# Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
# publisher: CGIAR / CRIG / COCOBOD (harmonized manual)
# year: unknown
# url: https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/93355/2nd_Draft_%20Harmonized_Manual.pdf
# attribution: Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana (harmonized draft)
# pages: 104
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

World CocoaFoundation
GHANA COCOA BOARD
HEAD OFFICE
COCOA HOUSE - P.O.Box 933, Accra. Tel:  + 233 - 302 - 66 17 52 / 66 18 72 /
66 17 57 / 67 89 16 / 67 89 72. Fax:  + 233 - 302- 66 71 04 / 66 98 98
E-mail:  www.cocobod.gh
COCOA HEALTH AND EXTENSION DIVISION
COCOA HEALTH AND EXTENSION DIVISION
THE SUSTAINABLE TRADE INITIATIVE
USAID
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
W
e express our sincerest gratitude to all who in diverse ways contributed to the development of the manuals and 
guides for cocoa extension in Ghana.
Our partners especially, WCF, USAID, IDH and COCOBOD who provided financial support for the production of 
the manuals and guides.
The National Experts’ listed below are highly commended for the development of the materials under very challenging 
circumstances. We are grateful to them.
We also thank all stakeholders involved in discussions leading to the production and reviewing the drafts. It is our fervent 
hope that they will continue to offer their expertise and time to improve extension delivery for cocoa and its associated 
crops in Ghana.
NATIONAL EXPERTS’ COMMITTEE
Dr. A.R. Cudjoe                       Chairman
Rev. Dr Emmanuel Ahia Clottey                     Member
Mr William Mintah Wiafe           Member
Mr. William Azalekor           Member
Mr. Andrews Akrofi           Member
Mr. Seidu Iddirisu Abu           Member
Mr. Obed Aboagye- Frimpong          Member
Mr. Morris Adu-Gyamfi           Member
PREFACE
F
or sustainable production of cocoa it is the view of the Cocoa Health and Extension Division (CHED) of the COCOBOD 
to have highly trained and motivated human resource to facilitate the processes, which can lead to increased and 
sustained cocoa production.  Though there are a lot   of   training   materials   available   to   train  the Ghanaian small   
holder   cocoa   farmers, some of the information provided by such materials conflict with the recommendations based on 
scientific research findings. Such materials tend to confuse the farmer and end up undermining the trust reposed in the 
agents of extension delivery to farmers. This state of affair has plagued extension delivery for a considerable length of 
time. Most stakeholders in the cocoa industry have identified the constraint posed by the multiplicity of confusing mes -
sages delivered to farmers.  The need for harmonising extension messages has become a priority activity for CHED and 
its partner organizations that have interest in facilitating increased productivity and sustainability of cocoa in Ghana.  A 
common   goal   is to   facilitate   the production of an extension manual, illustrative guide and a step by step training guide 
with modules on basic cocoa extension to   meet   the   rapid growth for knowledge and skills in the cocoa industry.  There 
has been the need for a closer   collaboration between CHED and major partners to engage national experts to produce a 
harmonized manual containing standard initiatives, messages and best practices for cocoa production and post produc-
tion handling of high grade cocoa beans.    It   is   hoped   that   this   manual   also   helps   to   increase productivity of the   
cocoa   sector, as certification is also covered in the manual to add premium to cocoa produced in Ghana. It is our view that 
only a productive cocoa farm   will   attract   the   younger   farmer   generation   to   carry   on   with   cocoa   production as 
a viable business option.
   This   manual   is   intended   for   professional   cocoa   extension   agents, field   supervisors and   trainers   who   have   
a   degree   or   diploma   in   agriculture and   are   involved   in   training   of   other   trainers   and/or   farmers.  
This extension manual can mainly be used by the master trainers, practitioners and extension officers with direct contact 
with cocoa farmers.    If   used   by   master   trainers, this   manual   can   also   serve   to   train   farmers   directly.   
Special   guidelines   have   been   developed   separately for   Extension agents/facilitators and lead   farmers to train 
farmers.   
The extension manual is supported by a training guide in modules, and an illustrative production guide for use by farmers. 
These materials help the   trainer to structure the delivery of the training sessions to enhance achievement of the most 
impact of the training.
It is the wish of COCOBOD in general and CHED in particular, that this collaboration with its partners,is to achieve the 
highest level of training for extension officers who are capable of facilitating farmer adoption of technologically advanced 
knowledge and skills to sustain the cocoa industry.
It is our fervent hope that the developed materials will contribute to the removal of multiplicity of extension messages, 
which confuse the cocoa farmer. It is also our wish that the materials containing harmonized messages are used by 
stakeholders for cocoa extension in Ghana
Executive Director,
Cocoa Health and Extension Division  (CHED).
DR. FRANCIS BAAH.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON COCOA PRODUCTION
1.0
INTRODUCTION
     1.1   HISTORY OF COCOA IN GHANA
• Cocoa was introduced into Ghana in 1879 from Fernando 
Po by Tetteh Quarshie.
• Within three decades of its introduction, cocoa had 
become the main export commodity of the then Gold Coast.
• By 1936, Ghana was producing about 50% of the world’s 
output of cocoa beans.
• Ghana remained the world’s leading producer of cocoa 
until 1977 when she was overtaken by Brazil.
• Brazil was later overtaken by Cote d’Ivoire in 1979.
• Ghana currently produces about 20% of the world’s 
output and it is the second leading producer/exporter of 
cocoa beans after Cote d’Ivoire. (Fig. 1.1)
Fig.1.1. Cocoa Production on Ghana, 2000/01 -2014/15.
        1.2   COCOA SECTOR IN GHANA
• The cocoa industry has been the mainstay of Ghana’s 
economy for a century, contributing 6 to 7% of GDP.
• Cocoa employs, directly and indirectly, over 2 million peo-
ple (about 7% of Ghana’s population).
• It is the leading foreign exchange earning agricultural 
commodity accounting for over 30%of the earnings of the 
agricultural sector.
• Cocoa generates about 25% of merchandise exports rev -
enue.
• The export tax on cocoa forms a significant proportion of 
Government revenue.
• Cocoa contributes significantly to socio economic devel -
opment by providing infrastructure in the form of roads, 
education and health facilities.
 8
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                  POST-HARVEST SECTOR FUNCTIONS
The post-harvest sector functions are undertaken by the 
Quality Control Company Limited (QCC) and the Cocoa 
Marketing Company (GH) Limited (CMC)
QUALITY CONTROL COMPANY
The QCC is responsible for the inspection, grading and 
sealing of cocoa, coffee and sheanuts for the local and 
international markets and also responsible for the 
disinfestation of produce.
COCOA MARKETING COMPANY OF GHANA (CMC) 
The CMC performs the external marketing function of the 
board as well as the takeover function within the internal 
marketing system.
     1.4   CHALLENGES AND THREATS TO SUSTAINABLE  
      COCOA PRODUCTION:
Inspite of governments’ interventions in the cocoa sector 
as well as the crop’s contribution to the national GDP and 
socio economic development, yield per unit area on farms 
is relatively low. This low productivity is due to many 
challenges including the following:
Tree stock: 
• Old age of trees (most cocoa farms are over 30 years old)
• Predominance of low yielding traditional varieties 
(limited use of hybrids)
• Small farm sizes due to fragmentation from land tenure 
arrangements
Farm management:
• Poor farm management practices (Non adherence to 
good agricultural practices) 
• Limited and irrational use of agro inputs such as 
fertilizers, fungicides, herbicides and insecticides
• Use of unapproved agro chemicals in cocoa production by 
some farmers
• Overly tall cocoa trees (10-15m) that make it difficult to 
manage
The environment:
• Erratic rainfall and rising temperatures as a result of 
climate change
• Competition for land and labour from unregulated 
surface mining activities (Galamsey) and establishment of 
non-cocoa crops (eg. rubber plantations)
• Expansion of cocoa areas by cutting down forests
                           1.3   GHANA COCOA BOARD
The Government in 1947 established the then Cocoa Mar -
keting Board which is now known as Ghana Cocoa Board 
(COCOBOD) to provide marketing services to cocoa farmers.
Ghana Cocoa Board is the statutory public institution that 
regulates and monitors the operations of Ghana’s cocoa 
industry. The functions of COCOBOD centre on the 
production, research, extension, quality control and inter -
nal and external marketing of cocoa.
In order to achieve its objectives and perform its functions 
effectively and efficiently, COCOBOD is organized into a 
Head Office which coordinates the activities of five special-
ized subsidiaries/divisions grouped into pre harvest and 
post-harvest sectors:
                  PRE-HARVEST SECTOR FUNCTIONS
The Pre-harvest Sector functions, which are performed by 
the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG), the Seed 
Production Division (SPD) and the Cocoa Health and 
Extension Division (CHED), deal with fundamental on farm 
issues.
COCOA RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF GHANA
Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana undertakes agronomic 
research into problems relating to sustainable produc -
tion of cocoa and other COCOBOD mandate crops (Shea, 
Cashew, Coffee and  Kola). It produces elite planting ma -
terials for SPD and also provides information and advice 
on matters relating to the production of cocoa and other 
mandated related crops. It also establishes strong linkage 
with extension for effective transfer of research findings, 
new findings, new technologies and agronomic practices 
to farmers.
SEED PRODUCTION DIVISION
The Seed Production Division is responsible for the 
multiplication and distribution of improved cocoa and 
coffee planting materials to farmers in the most efficient 
and cost effective manner.
THE COCOA HEALTH AND EXTENSION DIVISION (CHED)
CHED is responsible for the control of the Cocoa Swollen 
Shoot Virus Disease,  rehabilitation of old and unproductive 
cocoa farms and extension services in Ghana. The Division 
has the oversight and management responsibility of the new 
Cocoa Extension System which operates in the context 
of a Public Private Partnership. It provides an efficient 
and cost effective extension to cocoa farmers by assisting 
them to acquire knowledge and skills in good agricultural 
practices. Farmers are also trained in basic economics to 
orientate them to consider farming as a business venture 
which is impacting positively on farmers’ productivity.
 9
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
• Cocoa production under little or no shade which results in 
unsustainable production (production declines with time)
Extension Service delivery:
• Low Extension Agent to farmer ratio
• Inadequately resourced Extension staff
• Low technological uptake by farmers
• Inappropriate extension packages
• Varying extension messages by partners
Others:
• Old age of farmers
• Limited access to credit
• Poor access to and unavailability of inputs
• Labour shortage
• Smuggling of cocoa beans and inputs into neigh- 
 bouring countries
                 1.5    INTERVENTIONS
Due to the above challenges in the cocoa industry, 
COCOBOD and its Subsidiaries/Divisions have put in place 
certain interventions. Some of these interventions are:
SEEDLINGS PRODUCTION
The rationale for raising and distributing hybrid seedlings 
is to encourage the planting of improved planting materi -
als to ensure the sustainability of cocoa production.Seed -
ling production and distribution is done through the collab-
oration of Seed Production Division (SPD) and Cocoa Health 
and Extension Division (CHED).
COCOA HiTECH
The Cocoa HiTECH programme was introduced in 
2003 to demonstrate to farmers the importance of 
fertilizer application toboost cocoa production.
COCOA REHABILITATION
It is estimated that about 40% of the cocoa tree stock in 
Ghana is unproductive. This includes over-aged and CSSVD 
infected farms.
To remedy the situation:
1. COCOBOD encourages farmers to:
• Replant old/moribund farms with hybrid   
cocoa seedlings 
• Maintain productive cocoa farms through proper  
farm maintenance, removal of mistletoes and ap 
plication of fertilizer
• Cut-out (remove) and replant CSSVD infected   
farms with hybrid cocoa seedlings
EXTENSION SERVICE DELIVERY
Cocoa extension has gone through a lot of changes. The 
current extension system operates in the context of 
Public - Private Partnership in extension delivery and 
costs sharing. The principle is to operate with lean staff 
numbers who are professionally trained and highly 
qualified and motivated to provide cost effective and 
efficient cocoa extension services to business – oriented 
farmers.
•Farmers are educated on Good Agricultural Practices 
through rallies, group meetings, farm visits, home 
visits and radio programmes. Farmers are also edu -
cated to appreciate cocoa farming as a business through 
the Farmer Business School (FBS) concept jointly devel -
oped with German Development Cooperation (GIZ).
•Farmers are also educated on additional livelihood skills 
contributing to farmer livelihood diversification,particularly 
in cassava and gari production, plantain sucker multipli -
cation, cocoyam, chili pepper production, snail rearing and 
mushroom production. 
YOUTH IN COCOA
It is estimated that the average age of the Ghanaian cocoa 
farmer is about 55 years.  To sustain the cocoa 
industry,COCOBOD is encouraging the formation of youth 
groups to enhance and facilitate their access to farm lands, 
extension education, inputs and credit.
FARMER AWARDS
COCOBOD awards hardworking cocoa, shea and cof -
fee farmers at the District, Regional and National Levels 
during National Farmer’s day celebrations held annually. 
Farmers are selected based on their output, contribution to 
their communities and their adoption of Good Agronomic 
Practices.
 10
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
2.0   TECHNICAL INFORMATION
           2.1   COCOA BOTANY
Cocoa belongs to the genus Theobroma, sub family Sterculioidea and family Malvaceae. It has an elabo rate root 
system, trunk, branches, leaves and flowers which develop into pods. (fig.1.2)
PARTS OF THE COCOA TREE
ROOTS 
The root system of the mature cocoa tree consists  of a 
tap root of 120 -200cm long with an extensive system 
of lateral feeder roots most of which lie in the top 20cm 
of the soil, but which may extend to 40-50 cm where 
the humic layer is deep. The lateral roots grow far 
beyond the limit of the tree’s canopy forming a complex 
woven mat. At the tip of the main lateral roots there 
are bunches of fine rootlets which are especially abun -
dant where plant residues are rotting. The tap root di -
vides and has small rootlets at its extremity which 
indicates that the tap root absorbs water and nutri -
ents. (Fig.1.3)
BACKGROUND AND TECNICAL INFORMATION ON COCOA PRODUCTION
Fig.1.2 Parts of the Cocoa Tree
Fig 1.3 Cocoa root system

 11
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
TRUNK  
After germination and formation of the primary leaves 
the stem grows vertically for about 14 to 18 months. 
Further growth is then interrupted by the degeneration 
of the terminal bud. The first branches develop in the 
form of a whorl of five branches, growing horizontally. 
These fan branches form the framework of the tree and 
are called the jorquette. At this stage of growth, the 
trunk is about 1.5 m tall  (Fig 1.4).  One of the dormant 
axillary buds on the trunk below the branches of the 
jorquette develops and produces an orthotropic shoot 
termed the “Chupon” which behaves like the main 
stem. The chupon stops growing after about another 
height of 1.5m form a second jorquette. When the lat -
ter is well developed, branches of the first jorquette 
gradually die off. This growth pattern continues in wild 
cocoa plants, but in plantations, it is stopped and mod -
ified by pruning. The cocoa tree is generally pruned to a 
single stem at the level of the second jorquette.
LEAVES
The leaves are usually produced in flushes in March–April 
and September-October.The young leaves are soft and 
have green midribs and veins. When matured, the leaves 
become dark green. The leaves have stomata on their un -
der surface only. Their number per unit area is affected by 
the light intensity which also influences the size and thick-
ness of leaves. Those that develop under shade are larger 
and greener than those that grow in full sun.
FLOWERS
The flowers are small pinkish white or greenish white and 
are borne on small flower stalks in clusters on the trunk 
and branches at the cushions.  They are pollinated mainly 
by insects (midges). Pollination can also be done by hand 
by trained pollinators. (Fig 1.5)
 THE FRUIT
The fruit matures between 5 – 6 months after flowering. 
The young fruit is called cherelle. 
The fruit comes in various colours, shapes and sizes, de -
pending on the varieties and sometimes environmental 
factors. (Figures 1.6 a -d /Table 1.1)
Cherelles
Trunk
Pods
Fig 1.5:  Cocoa flowers
Fig. 1.6a Forastero  [Amelonado] Fig. 1.6b Criollo Fig. 1.6c Trinitario Fig. 1.6d Hybrid
CLASSIFICATION
Fig 1.4  Cocoa root system
 12
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
GROUP CHARACTERISTICS ORIGIN OBSERVATION
•Pod husk is hard
•Small and elongated pods
•Pod surface not warty and 
furrows inconspicuous.
•Unripe fruit colour is green; 
ripe fruit colour is yellow.
•Average number of beans/
pod 30 or more . Seeds are flat.
•High Amazonia 
(Peru, Ecuador 
and Colombia) 
and the Amazon 
basin (Brazil)
•Hardy and high yield-
ing.
•Used for selection of 
breeding varieties
•Dominant plant-
ing material in cocoa 
production.
•The West African 
Amelonado belongs to 
this group.
•Possess “harsh” fla-
vour with bitter taste
• Pod husk is soft
• Pod surface are warty and 
conspicuously 
furrowed. 
• Normally large and 
elongated. Red/green when 
unripe and yellow/orange 
when ripe.
• Average number of beans/
pod 20-30. Seeds are plump.
• Mexico,
• Nicaragua,
• Guatemala,
• Colombia,
•Venezuela and 
•Indonesia.
• Very vulnerable to 
diseases
• Possesses bland 
flavour and 
pleasant aroma
 
• Pod husk mostly hard
• It is an intermediate be-
tween Forastero and Criollo
• Unripe fruit colour is red/
purple, Ripe fruit colour is 
orange
• Pod surface is intermediate
• Average number of beans/
pod 30 or more . Seeds are 
intermediate.
• Trinidad and 
Venezuela
• Highly susceptible to 
Black pod
CRIOLLO
FORASTERO
[Eg. Amelonado]
TRINITARIO
TABLE 1.1 COCOA TYPES, CHARACTERISTICS, ORIGIN AND OBSERVATION
 13
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
GROUP CHARACTERISTICS ORIGIN OBSERVATION
• Has attributes of both 
parents that were crossed to 
produce the hybrid
• Establish easily
• Early bearing 
• High yielding
•Tolerant to black pod 
and cocoa swollen 
shoot virus diseases
•Tolerant to mirids/
capsids (akate)
Volta Region
Ampeyo, Akaa and Saviefe. (Fig 1.8)
           VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION
Vegetative propagation is a method used to produce 
plants with the same genetic makeup as the parent plant. 
One method of vegetative 
propagation is budding.
(Fig 1.7)
This method can be used in 
producing planting materi -
als for rehabilitating old/
moribund cocoa farms or 
establishing seed gardens.
Advantages of budding in 
cocoa:
1. Beneficial or desirable 
qualities in the parent plant are passed on directly to the 
young  plants without any change.
2. It shortens fruiting time of the plant.
3. A desirable growth pattern is achieved to make  
 work easier. 
Disadvantages of vegetative propagation in cocoa:
1. Skilled labour is required for its production. 
2. It is labour intensive.
3. Variation which is very important in breeding is  
 absent as compared to sexual reproduction.
4. Expensive tools and materials are required.
                 2.3    AGRO CLIMATIC REQUIREMENTS  
RAINFALL
Cocoa can be successfully grown in areas having rainfall 
between 1100mm and 3000mm per annum.  For optimum 
production, areas with rainfall between 1500mm-2000mm 
and a dry season of not more than three months with less 
                          2.2   PLANTING MATERIALS
Cocoa can be planted using either seeds derived from 
pollinated pods (hybrid seeds) or through vegetative 
propagation (clonal material) methods.
           HYBRID SEED PRODUCTION
Cocoa is planted using mixed hybrids (akokora bedi) of su-
perior high yielding trees. The advantages of these hybrids 
are that they:
1.  Establish easily
2.  Early bearing (two years after transplanting)
3.  High yielding 
4.  Have better tolerance to black pod and cocoa   
      swollen shoot virus diseases
5.  Have higher levels of tolerance to mirids/capsids   
     (akate)
Hybrid pods should be obtained from SPD seed gardens. 
Pods from natural sets (not hand pollinated) at the seed 
gardens as well as those from trees on farmers’ farms are 
pollinated naturally and cannot be used as planting mate-
rials. The seed gardens are located in the following towns: 
Eastern Region 
Apedwa, Bunso, Asamankese, Pankese/Akuase, Bieni, 
Oyoko, Akwadum and Tafo
Ashanti Region
Jamasi, Akomadan, Kwadaso, Poano, Fumso, Juaso 
Central Region
Breman Asikuma, Baako and Assin Fosu
Western Region
Achechere, Saamang and Buako
Brong Ahafo Region
Sankore, Goaso, Wamfie and Bechem
HYBRID
Fig.1.7  Budded cocoa

 14
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Location of SPD seed gardens
 14
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")
")")
")
")
")
")")
")
")
")
") ") ")
")
")
")
TAFO
AKAA
BUNSO
OYOKO
BAAKO
GOASO
BUAKO POANO
JUASO
FUMSO
AKUASE
APEDWA
BIENNE
WAMFIE
BECHEM
AMPEYO
JAMASI
AKWADUM
PANKESE
SANKORE
SAAMANG
SAVIEFE
KWADASO
AKOMADAN
ACHECHERE
ASAMANKESE
ASSIN FOSU
BREMAN ASIKUMA
ASHANTI
EASTERN
VOLTA
BRONG AHAFO
WESTERN SOUTH
CENTRAL
WESTERN NORTH
SUNYANI
OYOKO
PAPASE
JUASO
JASIKAN
MAMPONG
KPEVE/HOHOE
ODA
ENCHI
TAFO
JUKWA
TEPA
NKAWIE
BECHEM
FUMSO
ELUBO
OFFINSO
GOASO
NKAWKAW
BEREKUM
ASIKUMA
KEJEBRIL
SANKORE
BEKWAI
OBUASI
FOSO
TARKWA
BOAKO
SAMREBOI
ESSAM
NYAKROM
SUHUM
KADE
DUNKWA
MANKRANSO
AIYINASE
BOINSO
DIASO
BODI
ANTOAKROM
BAWDUANEW EDUBIASE
BIBIANI
DORMAA AHENKRO
HUNI VALLEY
ASANKRAGWA
TWIFO PRASO
DABOASE
OSINONEW ABIREM
WASSA AKROPONG
SEFWI BEKWAI
DADIESO
ADJUAFOAH
AKONTOMBRA
ASAMANKESE
JUABOSO
NKRANKWANTA
ADABORKROM DADIESOABA
1°0'0"E
1°0'0"E
0°0'0"
0°0'0"
1°0'0"W
1°0'0"W
2°0'0"W
2°0'0"W
3°0'0"W
3°0'0"W
4°0'0"W
4°0'0"W
8°0'0"N 8°0'0"N
7°0'0"N 7°0'0"N
6°0'0"N 6°0'0"N
5°0'0"N 5°0'0"N
SEED PRODUCTION DIVISION
SEED GARDENS IN GHANA 
Legend
") SEED GARDENS
ROADS
DISTRICT BOUNDARY
REGIONAL BOUNDARY
µ
0 30 60 90 12015
Kilometers
FIG.1.8   LOCATIONS OF COCOA SEED GARDENS IN 
GHANA
 15
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
than 100mm rain per month are preferred.  The rainfall 
regimes in Ashanti, Brong Ahafo, Central, Eastern, 
Western and Volta regions where cocoa is grown range 
from 1200mm to 1600 mm (Fig.1.9). Extremely wet and 
marshy areas as well as extremely dry areas are not 
suitable for cocoa production. 
TEMPERATURE
Cocoa thrives in areas with maximum temperatures 
ranging between 30-32oC and minimum 18-21 oC.  The av -
erage annual temperature should be around 21oC.  
RELATIVE HUMIDITY
Cocoa thrives in areas with relative humidity of 100% at 
night and about 70 -80 % during the day. 
Fig. 1.9  Rainfall map of Ghana
 16
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
GOOD AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES (GAPs)
          3.1 NURSERY PRACTICES    
  
The nursery is a site where cocoa seedlings are raised 
for transplanting to the field. Nursery operations should 
start between November and December.
SITE SELECTION
The site selected for the nursery should
• Be flat and preferably near a permanent source  
 of water 
•  Not be too far from the proposed farm
•  Have permeable soils to prevent water logging
•  Be sited at least 10m away from  an existing  
 cocoa farm
•  Not be near undesirable shade trees to  
 prevent possible CSSVD infection. 
LAND PREPARATION
Weed the area clean and remove any debris or obstacles 
from the site
SHADING
•  Temporary shade using palm fronds or shade  
 nets should be erected. This is to protect seed- 
 lings from direct sunlight. 
3.0
(a) Cocoa nursery with  shade netting    (b) Palm frond to provide shade
•   Provide shade of about 2 meters from the  
 ground to allow for a convenient working height.
•   Fence nurseries if there is the risk of distur- 
 bance from livestock or strangers
                  NURSING OF COCOA SEEDLINGS
There are two methods of raising cocoa seedlings. 
•  Polythene bag and 
•  Seed bed method.
NURSING OF COCOA SEEDLINGS IN POLYTHENE BAGS
1. Acquire polybags
a. Use smaller polybags (12.5 cm x 25 cm or 12.5 cm x 20 
cm and 12.5 cm x 15 cm) if nursing for 3 months
b. Use larger polybags (18 cm wide and 25 cm high (7 in 
x 10 in) if nursing is for up to  6 months.
2.  Create drainage holes in polybags. (Fig. 2.1)
3.  Fill poly bags to brim with top soil (top soil is 
high in organic matter, well aerated and has good wa -
ter retention). (Fig.2.2)
a b
 17
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
• Arrange bags in rows of 10 bags wide and up to 
100 bags long under the shade. (Fig.2.3)
• To facilitate maintenance operations (water -
ing, weeding, disease and pest control activities), paths of 
about 45–60 cm should be left between the rows. 
• The soil in the bags is watered before sowing the 
cocoa bean.  Place beans with the pointed end upwards at 
a depth of abut 2cm; if in doubt as to which is the pointed 
end, place bean flat at the same depth. (Fig.2.4)
• Do not sow already germinated beans 
• As the seedlings grow, sorting out should be done 
at regular intervals to avoid overcrowding and competition 
for light. (Fig.2.5)
Fig. 2.1 Preparation of drainage hole on polythene bags
Fig. 2.2  Filling of polythene bags with top soil Fig.2.3 Polythene bags arranged in rows
Fig.2.4  Sowing of beans in polythene bags Fig.2.5 Seedlings raised in polythene bags
a b
c
e f
d
 18
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
NURSING COCOA SEEDLINGS ON NURSERY BEDS
To construct a nursery bed it is important to weed and 
remove all plant debris and work the soil thoroughly to root 
depth. This is easiest when the soil is slightly damp but not 
wet. Once the seed bed is ready, avoid any physical com -
paction such as walking on the bed. 
• Dig, loosen and turn out the soil about half a 
metre wide. This will loosen the clump in the soil and also 
allow watering of the bed without stepping on it.
• Beds measuring 12.5cm high, 120cm wide and 
of any convenient length are made leaving a path of 45 to 
60cm wide between them. (Fig.2.6)  
• The top of the beds are levelled and furrows/
grooves 20 cm apart are made along the entire length of 
each bed.  
• Along each furrow/groove, fresh beans from pods 
obtained from SPD are sown 10 cm apart as described in 
the polythene bag method. (Fig.2.7)
• Seedlings raised on beds should not be kept for 
more than 4 months before transplanting.
• Provide shade over the seedlings similar to those 
sown in polybags. (Fig.2.8)
Fig. 2.6 Seed bed for raising cocoa 
Fig. 2.8  Seed bed with palm frond shade Fig.2.9 Watering of cocoa seedlings in the nursery
Fig. 2.5  Sowing of cocoa seeds on a seed bed 
seedlings
       MAINTENANCE OF THE NURSERY
Watering 
•  After germination, the seedlings should be watered 
every other day in the evening or in the morning with wa -
tering cans fitted with roses (Fig.2.9).  In the rainy season 
however, they should be watered as and when required.
Avoid over watering to reduce damping-off disease.
a b
c d
 19
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
 Weeding
• The weeds on the bed or in the polythene bag are 
removed by hand. 
FERTILIZER APPLICATION/MANURING
•  Nutrient requirement by cocoa seedlings in the 
nursery stage are not high if good top soils are used as the 
potting medium.
•  When the top soil used is deficient in nutrients, 
apply the recommended fertilizer (granular or foliar) to 
the cocoa seedlings one month after germination (see ap -
pendix…).  Ensure that granules do not fall on leaves of 
seedlings since it will cause scorching. Seedlings should be 
watered thoroughly after application of granular ferti -
lizer to dissolve the granules and ensure root contact and 
uptake.
PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL
• The seedlings are protected from diseases such as Phy -
tophthora blight and damping-off and pests such as leaf 
eaters with recommended fungicides and insecticides re -
spectively. Use pneumatic knapsack spraying machines in 
applying the fungicides/insecticides.
• Do not under any circumstance use knapsack sprayers 
meant for herbicide application for applying insecticides/
fungicides and vice versa.
HARDENING
• A month prior to transplanting, the shade should be  
gradually reduced. A week to transplanting the shade 
should be completely removed.These are done to harden 
the seedlings. During the hardening period, watering of 
seedlings should be reduced and there should be no 
fertilizer application.
TRANSPORTATION OF SEEDLINGS FROM NURSERY TO FIELD
Seedlings are highly vulnerable to damage during trans -
SOILS SUITABLE/UNSUITABLE FOR COCOA ARE PRESENTED IN THE FOLLOWING DIAGRAMS
portation, therefore they should not be over stucked or 
over crowded during transportation.
RECORD KEEPING
Proper nursery records must be kept to identify the source 
of planting materials, number of polybags acquired and 
filled, number of seeds planted and number germinated 
which will assist you to determine germination 
percentages.
       3.2   PREPLANTING OPERATIONS
SELECTION OF SITE
It is important to properly select an appropriate site before 
setting up the plantation. Select relatively flat or gently 
sloping land (avoid steep slopes). Rocky areas, sites with 
hard pans or marshy/extremely wet areas are not suit -
able.  If in doubt as to whether the land is suitable or not, 
consult the cocoa extension officer in your area.  
SOILS SUITABLE FOR COCOA 
Not all soils are suitable for cocoa cultivation. Cocoa trees 
grow well only in good quality soils, thus a suitable soil for 
cocoa cultivation should have the following characteristics:
(Fig.2.1.1)
• A texture with good-water-retaining properties but must 
also have good drainage and aeration.  The most preferred 
soils are loam or clayey loam.
• Must be at least 1.5m deep, this is particularly important 
if there is insufficient or poorly distributed rainfall. 
• The soil structure must be as homogenous as possible to 
allow roots to penetrate easily.
• The soil must be rich in nutrients with pH of 5–8. Soils 
with high organic matter content in the top soil (about 3.5% 
in the top 15cm) are most preferable. 
a b
 20
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                CHARACTERISTICS OF A FERTILE AND PRODUCTIVE SOIL
Fig.2.1.1 Soil suitable/unsuitable for growing cocoa  (A = Good soil for cocoa B, C, D = Bad soils for cocoa)
Some characteristics of a fertile and productive soil are as 
follows; (See map on Page 19)
1. A fertile and productive soil shows a complex 
physical and biological interactions involving 
decomposition of rock minerals and organic matter to 
form inorganic nutrient ions in soil water.
2. It has a good soil texture and this refers to the 
relative proportions of stones and cobbles, gravel, sand, 
silt and clay in the soil. This property affects and is related 
to several other soil properties such as aeration, water 
holding capacity, nutrient storage and water movement. 
Soil texture is therefore very important in terms of soil 
fertility. 
3. It also has optimum pH, which is the measure of 
the acidity or alkalinity of the soil, for plant growth. The pH 
scale is from 0 to 14 with pH 7 as the neutral point. A pH 
below 7 is acidic and above 7 is alkaline. Soil pH has a great 
effect on the solubility or availability of plant mineral 
nutrients. In the range 6.0-7.5 major nutrients and trace 
elements are available. With increasing acidity, the major 
nutrients, particularly P becomes less available and others 
Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn become major available creating possi -
ble toxicity problems. Soil pH also influences plant growth 
by its effect on the activity of beneficial microorganisms. 
For instance bacteria that decompose soil organic matter 
are hindered in strongly acidic soils. 
4. A fertile and productive soilhas high amount of 
soil organic matter.This is the soil fraction derived from 
materials of plant and animal origin. It includes residues in 
various stages of decomposition, soil organisms, and their 
synthesized by-products. Soil organic matter contains 
all essential plant nutrients and is therefore a storehouse 
of plant nutrients. The stored nutrients are released in a 
plant-available form upon decomposition. Organic 
matter is the soil adhesive that binds together the soil 
components into stable aggregates, provides energy for 
soil microorganisms improves water infiltration and 
holding capacity and reduces erosion potential. It is 
considered to be the most important indicator of soil 
quality, health and productivity Soil organic matter plays 
a critical role in soil processes such as cation exchange 
capacity. 
5. It has a thriving and healthy soil organism 
community which is the driving force behind nutrient 
cycling in the soil, which is the decomposition of organic 
matter into simpler units and synthesis of new products 
that can be used by plants. Soil organisms also play a 
critical role in development of soil structure. Soil organ -
isms are made up of macro-organisms (earthworm, nema-
todes, mites etc.) and microorganisms (bacteria, protozoa, 
fungi). One of the most important functions of microor -
ganisms is the decomposition of organic matter and this 
is performed by a variety of soil bacteria and fungi. An 
important product of the decomposition is humus (humic 
acid) which has a great influence on cation exchange 
capacity and water retention. 
6. It also has high cation exchange capacity (CEC), 
which is the ability of the soil to hold onto nutrients and 
prevent them from leaching beyond the roots. The more 
cation exchange capacity a soil has, the more likely the 
soil will have a higher fertility level. This is because the re-
tained cations are easily exchangeable with other cations 
in the soil solution and are therefore readily available for 
plant uptake. Clay and organic matter are the main sources 
of CEC. The more clay and organic matter (humus) a soil 
contains, the higher its cation exchange capacity. 
c d
 21
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Land suitability map for cocoa cultivation in Ghana
 22
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                   LAND PREPARATION 
The land should be cleared between December and Feb -
ruary and large undesirable trees including those which 
harbour the cocoa swollen shoot virus felled leaving 15–18 
desirable shade trees per hectare to provide permanent 
shade.
After clearing, it is advisable to leave the resulting debris to 
rot, though it can also be burnt. Burning however:
• Destroys a great deal of potential humus in the 
soil since it results in the release of large amounts of ash 
causing imbalance of nutrients in the soil. 
• Exposes the soil to erosion, which can lead to 
losses of organic matter. 
It is therefore recommended that farmers do selective 
burning or avoid burning.
LINING AND PEGGING
It is important to line and peg farms before cocoa is plant-
ed. Lining and pegging at the recommended spacing will 
optimize land use, facilitate husbandry practices, increase 
yield per unit area and increase income. In the process of 
lining and pegging, place a peg at a reference point and 
with a rope, tie the peg to make a horizontal line about 100 
metres to the edge of the land (baseline). From the 
reference peg and on the horizontal base line, mark the 
recommended spacing (3.0 metres) for the positions of the 
cocoa seedlings and put a peg at each marked point. 
Repeat the process vertically until the whole farm is 
covered. (Fig.2.1.2)
SPACING
The recommended spacing for hybrid cocoa seedlings is 
Fig.2.1.2 Lining and pegging of a cocoa farm
3.0m x 3.0m (10ft x 10ft) resulting in 1,111trees per 
hectare(435 seedlings per acre). Properly spaced cocoa 
trees are healthy looking, high yielding and allow farm 
operations such as weeding, spraying, harvesting, ferti -
lizer application to be easily carried out. In closely planted 
farms, the trees grow tall and thin as a result of competi -
tion for light, water and soil nutrients.
                              SHADE ESTABLISHMENT
Cocoa grows well under the shade of other plants. Tem -
porary or permanent shade plants should be established 
when cultivating cocoa in a multiple cropping system.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TEMPORARY SHADE
Food crops such as plantain and cocoyam should be plant-
ed at 3.0 m x 3.0 m and 1.0 m x 1.0 m respectively, to pro -
vide temporary shade for the young cocoa plants (Fig.2.1.3 
a, b and c )  The plantain should be spaced at 1.50 m away 
from the cocoa (i.e in between two cocoa seedlings) while 
the cocoyam should be planted 1.0 m away from the cocoa. 
The food crops should be planted in lines to facilitate farm 
operations such as weeding and spraying. Fruit trees such 
as pawpaw could be also planted at 3.0 m x 3.0 m to serve 
as temporary shade.In addition to this, quick growing trees 
like Glyricidia at a spacing of 6m x 6m can be used as tem-
porary shade trees.
The benefits of such a practice may include 
• food sustainability for the household, 
• income generation to partially offset the cost of  
 establishment, 
• provision of temporary shade for the young cocoa, 
• weed control 
• Nutrients recycling
• Reduction in insect pest damage.
Fig.2.1.3a. Cidrella and plantain as temporary
a
 23
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig.2.1.3b. Plantain as temporary shade for young 
cocoa for young cocoa
Fig.2.1.3c. Plantain and cocoyam as temporary 
shade for young cocoa  
DESIRABLE SHADE TREES UNDESIRABLE SHADE TREES
Terminalia ivoriensis  (Emire) Ceiba petandra (Onyina),
Terminalia superb (Ofram/Framo) Cola gigantea (Watapuo),
Albizia coriaria (Awiemfuo samina) Chlamydocola chlamydantha (Kra bise, Osonk-
robia, Penamfera)
Entandrophragma angolense (Edinam, cedar) Adansonia digitata (Odadee),
Funtumia elastica (Ofuntum) Blighia sapida (Akyewobiri)
Alsonia boonei (Nyamedua), Canthium glabriflorum (Gyapam, Nteteadupon),  
Pycnanthus angolensis (Otie) Musanga cecropioides (Odwuma)
Milicia excelsa (Odum) Carapa procera (Kwakuo bise)
Entandropragma angolense (Sapele) Lecaniodiscus cupanoides (Dwindwera)
Tieghemella heckelli (Baku/Makore) Myrianthus arboreus (Nyankuma)
Khaya grandifoliola/ivoriensis/anthotheca (Mahogany)
Entandrophragma utile (Utile)
TABLE 2.1 EXAMPLES OF DESIRABLE AND UNDESIRABLE SHADE TREES AND THEIR LOCAL NAMES
                3.3   GOOD FIELD PLANTING PRACTICES
  
PLANTING
Time of planting
The best time for planting cocoa is May to July, which is 
the major rainy season.Transplanting should be done in 
the middle of the rainy season or when rainfall is expect -
ed to ensure optimum seedling survival. Transplanting is 
done when seedlings raised in polybags or on beds 3 to 6 
months old.
HOLING AND TRANSPLANTING OF NURSED SEEDLINGS
In the case of seedlings raised in poly-bags:
• Water the seedlings heavily the day before transplanting
• Dig holes at 3m x 3.m spacing (10 ft x 10 ft) which are 
large and deep enough(depending on the size of the 
polybag used)  to contain the poly bag
• Dig holes at the pegged points well in advance before 
planting.  
• Remove bagscarefully in order not to lose too much soil 
from the roots of the seedlings.  
                       ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT SHADE
Where there are not enough desirable permanent shade trees on the farm at the time of clearing, trees such as Termi -
nalia ivoriensis and Albizia coriaria  can be planted with planting material supplied by the Forestry Com -
mission. Ownership of such trees are now guaranteed by completing and submitting a tree ownership form 
(Appendix 5).  It is recommended to plant 15 to 18 permanent shade trees per hectare. 
b c
 24
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
• Place seedlingswith a ball of soil around in the hole.
• Cover the hole with the same soil dug from it. Firm the 
soil and make sure that the soil level is the same as under 
nursery conditions.
• Avoid heapingsoil around the stem of the seedling
Avoid over stacking during seedling transportation to 
minimise losses. Also, NEVER bury the polybags with the 
seedling during transplanting.
In the case of seedlings raised on beds.
• Remove seedlings with plenty of soil around the roots 
using a machete (cutlass) or hand trowel 
• Place seedlings carefully in the dug holes. 
• Cover the hole firmly with the same soil dug from it and 
make sure that the soil level is the same as under nursery 
conditions
For transported seedlings and bare-root seedlings, prune 
off any damaged tap roots before planting to prevent 
seedling stunting.
It is important to note that in transporting seedlings raised 
on beds, the roots should be covered with moist jute sack 
to prevent excessive water loss.
ADVANTAGES OF USING NURSED SEEDLINGS
• Better plant growth and hence better field establishment 
due to initial care given to seedlings in nursery.
• Higher survival rate (90-100%) after transplanting.
• Reduced losses due to diseases and pest.
• Provides opportunity for establishing farm with only 
healthy and uniform seedlings
• Losses due to weeding are minimized since seedlings 
could be easily identified during the operation.
• Tolerate adverse climatic conditions better than 
seedlings raised by bare root method.
DISADVANTAGES OF USING NURSED SEEDLINGS
• It requires special growing facilities, eg polybags/
nurseries.
• It is expensive to use since more labour is needed to 
handle seedlings at the nursery and during transplanting.
• It involves transportation cost/difficulties.
                 PLANTING AT STAKE (DIRECT SEEDING)
Fresh cocoa beans may also be planted directly in the field 
(planting at stake).  A small hole with machete (cutlass) is 
dug and two beans are put in the hole which is thencovered 
with soil.  When the seedlings reach the four leaf stage 
(6-8 weeks after planting), the weaker one is removed.This 
method is popular with farmers who lack the resources to 
buy inputs for raising seedlings in the nursery.
ADVANTAGES OF PLANTING AT STAKE
• Planting at stake is more economical as it requires no 
special plant growing facilities. 
• Again since the seeds are originally sown in the place 
where they are eventually expected to be, it reduces 
transportation cost.
• Absence of transplanting shock.
• Seedlings can better tolerate adverse climatic conditions 
since they are developed in situ.
DISADVANTAGES OF PLANTING AT STAKE
• Planting at stake may result in poor growth of seedlings 
since they have to compete with weeds for nutrients and 
moisture.
• Seedlings in their very young stage are exposed to 
rodents and insect pests.
• There is little opportunity to select for uniform seedlings 
for field establishment.
• Greater care is needed during weeding to prevent 
mechanical damage, which could increase labour cost.
• More beans are needed to cover an area compared to the 
nursery method
       3.4   MULCHING 
Mulching should be done by spreading dry plant materi -
als or plantain pseudostem around the base of the cocoa 
seedling towards the end of the rainy season (October).  In 
termite infested areas, the mulch material should be treat-
ed with a solution of  Termiticide (refer to appendix…)
Mulching is essential for young cocoa during the first and 
second years and especially in the dry areas.  Mulching 
helps to:
• conserve soil moisture
• promote the activities of soil organisms
• smother weeds by cutting off source of light for  
 their growth
• reduce the direct impact of rain drops on the soil 
• slow down run-off and improve infiltration
• improve the nutrient status of the soil when the  
 mulch decays
• regulate soil temperature 
 25
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
          3.5   PRUNING 
Pruning is the removal of unwanted growth or parts of the 
cocoa plant. It is an important agronomic practice that is 
needed to optimize productivity and facilitate field 
operations. Pruning is necessary since it:
•          provides shape to the plant 
•          makes access through the farm and farm  
          operations easy
•          controls mistletoes and the spread of insects  
            pests
•          improves air circulation in the farm and as a re- 
            sult reduce the incidence and spread of fungal  
            diseases such as black pod
•          helps to reduce the cost on chemicals used for  
            spraying against insect pests and diseases
•          opens the canopy to allow more light into the farm
•          provides the necessary environment for increase  
            in yield
TYPES OF PRUNING
Several types of pruning are carried out in cocoa cultivation.  
These include formation, sanitary and structural pruning.
Formation pruning (Pruning of young cocoa)
FORMATION PRUNING (PRUNING OF YOUNG COCOA)
It is carried out in young cocoa to adjust the height of the 
first jorquette (branching) and create the desirable shape 
during establishment. It is done within the 3rd and 4th 
year of establishment.  This pruning process involves;
• Cutting off low lying branches to maintain the 
first point of branching (jorquette) at the height of at 
least 1.5 m.
• Removing excess shoots when more than 2 arise 
from the jorquette and leaving the 2 shoots facing each 
other. Shoots are removed from the center to open up the 
cocoa canopy.
SANITARY PRUNING (PRUNING OF MATURE COCOA)
Sanitary pruning is carried out throughout the year 
in mature cocoa to remove diseased or unnecessary 
branches.  
It involves removal of
• All disease infected branches and mummified  
 pods
• Epiphytes and mistletoes on the branches of 
cocoa in the canopy in September to March when they can 
easily be detected due to the presence of flowers.  
STRUCTURAL PRUNING (PRUNING OF MATURE COCOA)
Structural pruning is carried out in mature cocoa to shape 
the canopy to desired size and architecture.  This should 
Fig.2.1.4. Tools for pruning: a. Standard pruner 
b. cutlass  c. motorised prunner  and d. Secateurs
be done before the onset of the rainy season (April/May).
It involves removal of:
• Basal shoots (chupons) from the main stem at  
 every round of weeding.
• Excess branches
• Interlocking branches
EQUIPMENTS FOR PRUNING: 
A standard pruner or cutlass  (Fig.2.1.4 a, b, c and d) with 
the aid of a ladder is used in the removal of mistletoes 
and unwanted branches on older trees. The branches of 
the cocoa tree are cut in a slant manner to allow water 
to drip off the cut surfaces and prevent fungal infection. 
Secateurs are used for pruning young cocoa. 
                  3.6   SHADE MANAGEMENT IN COCOA 
  
It is important to establish a good shade level for all stages 
of cocoa to:
• Provide protection against pests like capsid
• Reduce the incidence of Black pod disease 
• Reduce nutritional imbalance
• Reduce dieback in mature cocoa and
• Increase yield. 
Shade levels of 30% sunlight is necessary when the cocoa 
trees are young (0 – 3 years) and 70% sunlight when the 
cocoa tree is mature (4 years and beyond).
In cases where the overhead shade is denser than the 
a
c
b
d
 26
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
recommended shade levels, thinning by gradual removal 
of temporary shade trees and a reduction in the number 
of mature forest trees should be carried out. On the other 
hand, more shade trees should be planted if the shade lev-
els are below the recommendations.
Fig.2.1.5c.  Cocoa with well-spaced permanent shade 
of Terminalia sp.
Fig.2.1.5a. Cocoa-coconut intercropping system
Fig.2.1.5b. Cocoa-multiple crop intercropping 
system
Agro forestry
Some cocoa farmers in Ghana intercrop cocoa with some 
fruit and tree crops which serve as shade, source of food, 
lumber or extra income  (Fig.2.1.5 a, b, and c) . These trees 
may include; avocado, coconut, mango, citrus, cola, and 
breadfruit. Although these crops are of economic benefit 
to the farmer, many of them are not suitable for intercrop-
ping with cocoa. For optimum performance in an intercrop 
system with cocoa, the right fruit/tree crop should be se -
lected and planted at the appropriate spacing. For example 
in cocoa/coconut intercrop the coconut should be planted 
at spacing of at least 10.1m triangular and the cocoa at 
3m x 3m. (Fig.2.1.5a)
              3.7   WEED MANAGEMENT  
Weed control in cocoa farms is necessary because weeds:
 
•  compete with cocoa for nutrients, water and light 
•  encourage incidence of insect pests and rodents  
 that attack  the plants
•  make the farm humid and increase the incidence  
 of the black pod disease 
•  make the collection of harvested pods difficult  
 resulting in loss of pods
•  Impede farm operations like spraying
Weed incidence is usually high where the cocoa canopy 
is not completely closed. Weeds can be controlled with a 
combination of methods.This may include manual (with 
machete/cutlass, slashers and hoe) or chemically 
(herbicides), cover crops and shade manipulation. The 
use of a combination of two or more of these methods is 
known as integrated weed management.
MANUAL WEED CONTROL
Manual weeding should be done 3-4 times in a year (March, 
May-June August and November), for young farms and 
about twice a year (April-May and July-August) in a mature 
farm. Brush the farm when the weeds reach a height of 30 
to 45 cm. The weeds are brushed close to the ground and 
climbers removed. Manual weeding is much prefered from 
and environmental point of view.
CHEMICAL WEED CONTROL
Herbicides such as Glyphosate may be used to control 
weeds in both young and matured cocoa. The applica -
tion rate, frequency of application, as well as the nozzle to 
be used for glyphosate application is shown in Table 2.2. 
Glyphosate at a dossage of 1.5 -2litres per hectre (225 - 
300ml) per 15l pneumatic knapsack is recommended for 
weed control in cocoa.
The efficiency of herbicide application is very much im -
proved when the cocoa is planted in lines.  It is impor -
tant to avoid contact between the cocoa seedling, food 
crops and the herbicide by directing the spray against the 
weeds. To avoid spray drift on cocoa seedlings and food 
crops, spraying should be done early in the morning or 
late in the afternoon. Do not spray Glyphosate when it is 
threatening to rain. For safety reasons, wear protective 
clothing (Fig.2.1.6) and avoid eating, drinking or smoking 
whilst spraying.  Wash down immediately after spraying 
and avoid contaminating nearby streams and other water 
bodies. Properly dispose of herbicide containers by burying 
them and do not use them for storing water or food. Check 
leakages of knapsack sprayer before use. (Fig.2.1.7)
a
b
c
 27
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
How to calculate the quantity of chemical needed for 
spraying
The quantity of chemical needed to be put in both the 
pneumatic and motorized knapsack spraying machine can 
be computed by the following formula:
INDICATORS YOUNG  COCOA MATURE COCOA
Application rate/ha 1 litre of Glyphosate in 100 litres of 
water OR
About1 milk tin Glyphosate in 15 litres 
knapsack sprayer full of water
1 litre of Glyphosate in 100 litres of 
water OR
About1 milk tin Glyphosate in 15 
litres knapsack sprayer full of water
Frequency of application 3 times in a year 2 times in a year
Nozzle to be used The knapsack sprayer must be fitted 
with a low volume nozzle (e.g Lumark 
AN 1.0)
The knapsack sprayer must be 
fitted with a low volume nozzle (e.g 
Lumark AN 1.0)
TABLE 2.2 USE OF GLYPHOSATE IN WEED CONTROL
Fig.2.1.6  Chemical weed control in progress 
Consider  
Fig.2.1.7 Pneumatic knapsack sprayer with samples 
of herbicides
                              USE OF COVER CROPS
Cover crops (leguminous and non-leguminous) such as 
Mucuna puriens, Tropical kudzu (Pueraria phaseoloides), Sty-
losanthes sp. may normally be planted between the rows 
of young cocoa plants to manage weeds on the farm.  This 
protects the soil and sometimes provides nutrients to the 
soil when nitrogen fixing crops are used. However, care 
should be taken to ensure that the cover crops do not 
entangle the young cocoa plants.
Mucuna (seed, leafs and flower)
     Q = C/W x R x 1000   
 
 Where Q is quantity of chemical needed in ml
C is capacity of knapsack sprayer
W is volume of water recommended per ha
R is recommended rate of chemical per ha
 28
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
2. USE OF “STOP-WASH LINES”
To prevent erosion along slopes, blockades or barrages 
can be built across the slope to reduce the speed of 
water movement and also trap soil. A common type of 
such blockade is “stop-wash lines”. 
3. TERRACING
A terrace is a leveled section of a sloping land that is 
used for cultivating crops. When digging the terraces, it 
is important that the fertile top soil is kept aside and 
later spread on top of the finished terrace. Cover crops 
or grass may be grown on the slopes between the 
terraces to prevent soil loss.
4.  DIVERSION OF SURFACE RUN-OFF
Where precipitation is in excess of crop requirements, 
drains and ditches could be constructed to divert 
excess water. 
     3.9   PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT OPERATIONS
In addition to the use of improved planting materi -
als and good farm management practices, soil fertility 
management, mistletoe infestation, control of pests and 
diseases should be addressed to optimise productivity 
on farms
SOIL FERTILITY MANAGEMENT
Soil fertility refers to the capacity of the soil to supply 
nutrients to the plant. A fertile soil is the one that 
contains an adequate supply of all the nutrients required 
for the optimum growth of plants. However, such a soil 
cannot be necessarily considered a productive one. To be 
productive, a soil must also provide a satisfactory 
environment for plant growth and the nutrients it 
contains must be available for use by the plants. 
Intensive cultivation methods, deforestation and excessive 
use of synthetic pesticides, including herbicides, can lead 
to a reduction of soil fertility and to soil degradation. Soil 
fertility decreases with crop production, because with the 
harvest large amounts of nutrients are removed from the 
soil 
The fertility of soils can be improved by the use of 
fertilizers which contain essential plant nutrient.
PLANT NUTRIENTS
Plant nutrients come in two main forms depending on 
their amounts required by plants. These are macro 
and micro nutrients. While macro nutrients are required 
in larger amounts, very little of micro nutrients are utilized 
by plants.  
 
The macro nutrients are Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P) and 
Potassium (K)whiles the micro nutrients consist of Calci -
um (Ca), Sulfur (S), Magnesium (Mg), Iron (Fe), Zinc (Zn), 
Manganese (Mn), Boron (B), Molybdenum (Mo), Copper (Cu), 
Sodium (Na) and Silicon (Si).
     3.8   SOIL EROSION MANAGEMENT
Soil erosion is one of the most serious and irreversible 
threats to soil fertility. It carries away the most fertile 
parts of the soil: the top soil and the finer clay fractions 
which are rich in humus and nutrients. Even low 
erosion rates which are almost invisible can over the 
years have a severe impact on soils. It is therefore of 
vital importance to protect the soil from erosion. 
CAUSES OF SOIL EROSION 
During the dry season, ground vegetation usually thins 
out and leaves the soil uncovered. 
As a result, when it rains, large amount of topsoil can 
be washed away, affecting soil fertility. Not only slop -
ing land is prone to soil erosion but also flat fields can 
be severely affected if not protected by any soil cover. 
Factors affecting soil erosion include:
• soil types (silt, sand loam) 
• soil structure
• soil cover
• slope and
• severity of rainfall. 
Fine tilth soils that have no vegetative cover, situated 
on a slope are more prone to erosion.A risk assess -
ment should be made to find out which parts of the 
farm are most prone to erosion. Based on this assess -
ment, a management plan to reduce soil erosion should 
be made. 
Some of the practical steps for erosion prevention 
include:
1. Mulching (see chapter …page…)
2. Use of cover crop (see chapter … page..)
3. Use of shade trees
4. Use of “stop wash lines”
5. Terracing
6. Diversion of surface run-off
1. USE OF SHADE TREES
In natural forests  several layers of dense canopy 
break the speed of the rain drops falling on the ground. 
Large drops formed on leaves of the tree-tops are 
caught by the canopy of shrubs and ground vegeta -
tion. The water drops reach the soil at less speed and 
thus have a smaller splashing effect on soil parti -
cles. Hence, natural forests are less susceptible to 
erosion. This characteristic of natural forests can be 
recreated on cocoa farms to reduce erosion. It can be 
achieved through leaving or planting shade trees on 
farms during land preparation. Soil erosion control is 
especially important in areas near water sources and in 
steep areas. Even when you don’t farm in those areas, 
you should still plant trees against soil erosion.
 29
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
plied. It can also be applied when there is the need to ob -
tain a quick response from fertilizers to correct nutrient 
deficiencies since uptake of nutrients through the leaves is 
much faster than through the roots.
3. Organic fertilizer –Organic fertilizers contain an appre -
ciable amount of macro and micro nutrients that can be 
made available to plants after mineralisation. They also 
improve soil physical characteristics and soil moisture reg-
ulation and conservation. The use of organic fertilizers also 
reduce the risk of environmental pollution associated with 
conventional fertilizers. 
            FERTILIZER APPLICATION IN YOUNG COCOA 
            (up to 18 months old)
Virgin or secondary forest soils have high fertility and will 
supportthe growth of cocoa. However, when new farms are 
established on previously cropped cocoa or food crop soils 
that has declined in fertility there is the need to apply fer -
tilizers to boostthe initial growth of the cocoa. In the latter 
case the following fertilizer application is recommended: 
GRANULAR FERTILIZER 
Apply 70g or a match box full of ammonium sulphate on 
the soil surface in a 10 cm circular band about 20 - 40 cm 
from the base of the plant when the soil is moist as after 
a rainfall.
FOLIAR FERTILIZER
(i) Apply recommended liquid fertilizeras follows:
• Half fill the spraying machine with clean water
• Add recommended dosage of liquid fertilizer and  
 add more water to fill the tank
• Shake the spraying machine to ensure complete  
 mixture of the solution.
• Spray the solution unto the cocoa leaves until  
 completely wet.
CONDITIONS FOR USE OF FOLIAR/LIQUID FERTILIZERS:
• Avoid spraying on cocoa plants under stress.
• Apply in the morning to avoid high wind and  
 strong sunshine.
• Apply with motorised knapsack sprayer (mist  
 blower) for tall cocoa plants and a pneumatic  
 knapsack for medium-sized plants.   
            FERTILIZER APPLICATION IN MATURE COCOA 
The fertility of soils cropped to cocoa declines with time be-
cause soil nutrients are constantly depleted through pod 
and beans removal from the farm. After about ten years 
of bearing the yield of cocoa trees tends to decline. This 
To obtain maximum benefit from fertilizer application, the 
under-listed factors must be considered; 
• high yielding recommended cocoa varieties should 
be used when establishing new farms
• weeds, insect pests and black pod disease must 
be controlled as recommended.
• swollen shoot infected trees, chupons and 
mistletoes must be removed.
• shade at recommended level should be 
maintained (refer to section on shade in cocoa farms)
                                        FERTILIZERS
Fertilizers are substances that contain nutrients and are 
applied to the soil or plant leaves to provide nourishment 
for plants. Continuous fertilizer applications for 3-4 years 
can double yields of cocoa. However, cocoa yield increases 
in the first two years of application are usually minimal.
TYPES OF FERTILIZERS
There are two main types of fertilizers.These are (i) organic 
and (ii) inorganic fertilizers. Organic fertilizers are derived 
from plant and animal sources. Examples of such fertiliz -
ers are poultry manure, compost cocoa pod husk ash. In -
organic fertilizers are made from non-living substances 
such as gases, rocks, industrial chemicals etc. Inorganic 
fertilizers are made up of solid and liquid fertilizers. The 
solid fertilizers are applied to the soil while the liquid ones 
are usually applied to the leaves. 
FERTILIZER REQUIREMENT AND ITS DETERMINATION
Crop fertilizer requirement depends on the stage of plant 
growth, soil type and its fertility. The crop nutrient require-
ment at any specific location (site-specific) can be deter -
mined by plant and soil analysis.
FERTILIZERS RECOMMENDED FOR COCOA
Three types of fertilizers are recommended by COCOBOD 
for cocoa  (Appendix 1)  as follows: 
1. Conventional (inorganic) fertilizers
Conventional fertilizers are applied to the soil either by 
broadcasting under cocoa trees or as rings under cocoa 
trees once a year. The best time of application is the be -
ginning of the main rains (April/May). Fertilizer application 
can be carried out on the same plot for four consecutive 
years with a one to two year break.   
2.  Foliar/Liquid fertilizers 
Foliar/liquid fertilizers usually contain minor nutrients, 
such as magnesium, zinc andboron that are required in 
small quantities and sometimes some in addition to major 
plant nutrients (Nitrogen, Potassium and Phosphorous).  
Foliar/liquid fertilizers are usually applied when there is 
lack of soil moisture when solid fertilizers cannot be ap -
 30
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
decline has been attributed mainly to soil fertility decline in 
addition to other factors. In such case the fertility of such 
soils can be improved by the use of fertilizers. 
NB:
• Some fertilisers (such as chicken manure or gran-
ular fertilisers) can damage plant leaves when there is di -
rect contact between the fertiliser and the leaf. 
• The overuse of chemical fertilisers can harm use -
ful microorganisms in the soil.
•  Applying them when there is no rain may cause 
burning effects on the leaves of plants.
• Using more than the recommended dosage is a 
waste of money and bad for the environment.
• Always store fertilisers in a dry and locked place. 
• Never allow children to be involved in applying 
fertilisers. 
• Always read labels on fertiliser packages before 
applying them; or consult a competent agent before ap -
plication.
• Personal Protective Equipments (PPE)
         COMPOSTING
Composting is an aerobic (in the presence of air) method 
of decomposing solid wastes. The process involves the 
breakdown of organic waste into humus. 
Composting organisms require four equally important in -
gredients to work effectively. These are:
1.Carbon — for energy; the microbial oxidation of carbon 
produces the heat, if included at suggested levels. High 
carbon materials tend to be brown and dry.
2.Nitrogen — to grow and reproduce more organisms to 
oxidize the carbon. High nitrogen materials tend to be 
green (or colorful, such as fruits and vegetables) and wet.
3.Oxygen — for oxidizing the carbon, the decomposition 
process.
4. Water — in the right amounts to maintain activity with-
out causing anaerobic conditions.
The most efficient composting occurs with an optimal 
carbon: nitrogen ratio of about 10:1 to 20:1.The resultant 
material is allowed to fully stabilize and mature through a 
curing process. 
Benefits of Compost
(i) Improves the soil structure, porosity and density, 
thus creating a better plant root environment. 
(ii) Increases moisture infiltration and permeability 
of heavy soils, thus reducing erosion and runoff. 
(iii) Improves water-holding capacity, thus reducing 
water loss and leaching in sandy soils.
(iv) Although often seen as a good source of nitro -
gen, phosphorous and potassium, compost also contains 
micronutrients essential for plant growth. Since compost 
contains relatively stable sources of organic matter, these 
nutrients are supplied in a slow-release form
(v) Controls or suppresses certain soil-borne plant 
pathogens since it is known that increased population of 
certain microorganisms may suppress specific plant dis -
eases such as Pythium and Fusarium as well as nema -
todes.
(vi) Supplies significant quantities of organic matter 
for soil microorganisms including bacteria, protozoa, actin-
omycetes and fungi. These organisms play an important 
role in organic matter decomposition which, in turn, leads 
to humus formation and nutrient availability and can also 
promote root activity as specific fungi work symbiotically 
with plant roots, assisting them in the extraction of nutri -
ents from soils.
(vii) Improves cation exchange capacity (CEC) of soils 
and growing media, thus improving their ability to hold nu-
trients for plant use. 
(viii) Supplies beneficial micro-organisms to soils and 
growing media.
(ix) Improves and stabilizes soil pH. 
THINGS TO DO BEFORE AND DURING COMPOSTING
1. Organic materials containing carbon and nitrogen 
must be used and it is easier to obtain a good mixture if 
the pile is built up all at once. The organic materials may be 
arranged in layersas in traditional methods but they can 
also be mixed. Shredded organic materials heat up rapidly, 
decompose quickly, and produce uniform compost. The de-
composition rate increases with the size of the composting 
materials.Organic materials that can be composted include 
cocoa pod husk, cocoa bean shell, coffee husk, animal ma -
nure, fireplace ashes, fruits and vegetables, grass clippings 
straw, leaves, sawdust, wood chips, yard trimmings. Or -
ganic materials that cannot be composted include charcoal 
ash, diseased or insect-ridden plants parts, fats (grease, 
lard, or oils), meat or fish bones and scraps, yard trim -
mings treated with chemical pesticides.  These materials 
may contain substances harmful to plants. The diseases 
or insects might survive and be transferred back to other 
plants. Some of them may create odour problems and at -
tract pests such as rodents and flies. Insecticides might kill 
beneficial composting organisms.
2. Organic materials need water to decompose and 
so if the pile becomes too dry, the decay process will slow 
down. If very wet materials are used in building the pile 
they must be mixed with dry materials. On the other hand 
if all the materials are very dry, soak them with water be -
fore using. Whenever the pile is turned, the moisture con -
tent must be checked and water added when necessary. 
Too much water is just as detrimental as the lack of water. 
In an overly wet pile, water replaces the air, creating an an-
aerobic environment, slowing decomposition.
3. Air circulation is an important element in a 
compost pile. Most of the organisms that decom -
 31
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
pose organic matter need air to survive. Air should be 
able to pass through the pile. To achieve this, materials 
that are easily compacted such as ashes or sawdust must 
not be used without mixing them with a coarser material 
first. Tree branches or even ventilation tubes can be placed 
vertically into different parts of the pile, to be shaken oc -
casionally, to maximize air circulation. A more labor-in -
tensive way to re-oxygenate the pile is to turn the pile by 
hand, using a large garden or compost fork.
4. The temperature of the managed pile is impor -
tant. It indicates the activity of the decomposition pro -
cess. The easiest way to track the temperature inside the 
pile is by feeling it. It is okay if it is warm. If it is the same 
temperature as the outside air, the microbial activity has 
slowed down and more easily decomposable materials 
such as grass clippings, kitchen waste, or manure need to 
be added to the pile. Decomposition occurs most efficiently 
when the temperature inside the pile is between 40oC and 
55oC. It is best not to turn the pile while it is between these 
temperatures, but rather when the temperature is below 
40oC or above 55oC. This keeps the pile operating at its 
peak. Most disease pathogens die when exposed to 55oC 
for 10-15 minutes, though some weed seeds are killed only 
when they’re heated to between 60oC and 65oC. If weed 
seeds are a problem, let the pile reach 65oC during the first 
heating period, then drop back down to the original tem -
perature range. Maintaining temperatures above 55oC can 
kill the decomposing microbes.
Methods of composting 
Composting can be carried in bins of various sizes made 
up of wood or metal, freestanding piles or in dug out pits 
in the ground.  
Compost site selection
Any pile of organic matter will eventually rot, but a well-
chosen site can speed up the process. Look for a level, well-
drained, shadier spot so that the compost can be sheltered 
and doesn’t dry out too quickly. Build the compost pile over 
soil or lawn rather than concrete or asphalt, to take ad -
vantage of the earthworms, beneficial microbes, and other 
decomposers, which will migrate up and down as the sea -
sons change. Uncovered soil also allows for drainage.
Characteristics of matured compost
(1) It has brownish to black colour, sometimes with a 
white microbial patch.
(2) Its smell ranges from odorless, soil-earthy like or 
special compost smell.
(3) When a small amount of it is shaken in water a 
brownish to black colour is obtained.
(4) When water extract of compost is watered to cab-
bage seeds on blotting paper or toilet roll paper seed ger -
mination of above 90% is obtained.
Phytotoxicity of composts
The application of immature compost to soil will adversely 
affect the growth of crops. As such compost must mature 
before it can be used for crops. The toxins in the imma -
ture compost are inactivated as the decomposition process 
ceases and the compost becomes matured.
           3.10   INTEGRATED CROP, PESTS AND DISEASES 
           MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION
In the course of managing cocoa against pest and diseas -
es, various strategies such as the use of improved varie -
ties, cultural, biological and chemical control methods are 
applied. Chemicals however have adverse effect on the en-
vironment and may also harm the end users of the crops. 
In order to minimise the adverse effects of chemicals used 
in pests and diseases control, the Integrated Pest Man -
agement (IPM) concept was developed. The concept is now 
described as integrated crop management (ICM) because 
in addition to pest and diseases control, several environ -
mental factors need to be manipulated in order to obtain a 
healthy crop. Thus by practising IPM or ICM, the growth of 
the crop can be enhanced. 
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 
The general principles and practices involve the following:
1.   Obtain and plant improved healthy planting materials
2.   Select fertile soils and suitable planting sites
3.   Adopt good nursery practices
4.  Adopt appropriate planting distances and planting                       
patterns
5.   Plant crops at appropriate times
6.   Adopt good soil management practices
7.   Adopt suitable water management practices
8.   Carry out regular weed management
9.   Visit field regularly
10. Maintain high level of sanitation
11. Manage pests and disease efficiently
12. Enhance the build-up of populations of natural 
enemies or beneficials
13. Minimise the application of chemical pesticides 
14. Adopt good harvesting techniques
15. Adopt good, clean storage systems
DECISION MAKING PROCESS OF IPM OR ICM
This process involves the following steps:
Observe – so that you know what is happening to your crop
Learn     – to understand the organism or problem affecting 
your crop and the nature of the damage caused
Decide   – on the best action to take to reduce the crop 
damage caused by pest, disease or  environmental factors
 32
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig.2.1.8 Red vein-banding in young leaves
Fig.2.1.9 Various shades of chlorosis in 
mature leaves (including fern pattern)
Fig2.2.1a,b. Vein clearing in a mature leaves
Fig 2.2.2.Green vein banding in mature leaves
Act         – upon the management method chosen in order to 
overcome the problem
              3.10.1  MANAGEMENT OF COCOA DISEASES 
Based on their economic importance, diseases of cocoa in 
Ghana can be grouped into major and minor diseases:
• The major diseases are the cocoa swollen shoot 
virus disease (CSSVD) and the Phytophthora pod rot (black 
pod disease)
• The minor diseases include Phytophthora canker, 
pink disease, thread blight, mealy pods, root rot, cushion 
gall, Lasiodiplodia or charcoal pod rot, warty pods and 
damping off disease of nursery plants.
                     MAJOR DISEASES
COCOA SWOLLEN SHOOT VIRUS DISEASE (CSSVD)
Cocoa swollen shoot virus disease (CSSVD) lives in the 
plant and uses the plant’s physical and chemical tools to 
spread itself. 
•  CSSV multiplies and moves from one cell to the 
other thereby causing disease in the cocoa plant.
•   CSSV  depend on living organisms to live, and so 
when its hosts die the virus also dies 
• For CSSV to survive, it must be able to move from 
one host plant to the other. This movement of CSSV is 
aided by mealybug species (insects), which are capable of 
transmitting CSSV from one plant to the other (vector).
HOW CAN ONE TELL WHETHER A COCOA PLANT IS INFECTED 
OR NOT?
A cocoa plant infected with CSSV exhibits typical symp -
toms. 
• The diseases starts with red-vein banding in young 
leaves (Fig.2.1.8) 
•   In mature leaves , different shades of chlorotic patterns 
develop. This  include mosaic, fern pattern and different 
shades of yellowing or chlorosis. (Fig.2.1.9)
•  On some occasions, the chlorophyll of the leaves be -
comes bleached along the secondary veins leading to the 
condition termed vein-clearing. (Fig.2.2.1 a and b)
•  The entire leaf may be bleached leaving the veins, which 
can also lead to the symptom called green vein banding. 
(Fig.2.2.2)
•  In   the advanced phase in the development of the dis -
ease, swellings may develop in all parts of the plant i.e. 
stem, fans, chupons and roots swellings (Fig 13.5a,b,c). 
•   At the terminal stage of the disease, stems or shoot may 
start dying back usually starting from the tip – a condition 
referred to as tip or shoot dieback. (Fig.2.2.3 a and b) At the 
scenes of serious outbreaks, hundreds of dying trees can 
be seen with tip or shoot dieback. (Fig.2.2.4 a and b)
a b
 33
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig.2.2.3a and b Swellings (eg.  Fan, chupon and stem swellings)
Fig.2.2.4a and b Shoot dieback
•  Apart from cocoa plants, CSSV can survive and multiply 
in other plants, which are termed alternative host plants. 
•  Several tree species such as Ceiba pentandra (Fig.2.2.5), 
Sterculia tragacantha (Fig.2.2.6), Adansonia digitata (Fig.2. 
2.7), Cola chlamydantha (Fig.2.2.8) and Cola gigantia have 
been shown to be alternative host of CSSV.
Fig.2.2.5 Ceiba pentandra . Note the characteristic tongs on the stem
i.  ALTERNATIVE HOST PLANTS
a
a
b
b
 34
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig.2.2.6 Sterculia tragancantha . Note the broad leaves
Fig.2.2.7: Adansonia gigitata  Fig.2.2.8 Cola chlamydantha
           ii.  WHERE CAN CSSVD BE FOUND IN GHANA?
• CSSVD was first discovered in the New Juaben 
area in the Eastern Region but it is now present in all the 
cocoa growing regions of Ghana
• The incidence or the distribution of the disease in 
the country is not  uniform. In  some areas or regions the 
incidence is high (Eastern and Western Regions) while in 
others it is low
Control of CSSVD
To control CSSVD, either the virus or the vector can be tar -
geted. The current strategy for controlling CSSVD employs 
both approaches.
ERADICATION CAMPAIGN
Control depends on the size of infections. If the number of 
visibly infected trees (VIS) is up to ten, all the trees within 
a radius of 5 meters from the VIS are cut. If the number is 
between 11 to 100 trees within a radius of 10 metres are 
cut; and where the trees are over 100 VIS within 15 meters 
radius are removed.
If infections are detected early,spot treatment of removing 
the infected trees and their contacts are carried out before 
the disease can spread to other trees.
Use of barrier crops
This is to cut out large areas for replanting to be done with 
the provision of a barrier of immune crops around the re -
planted fields. This is based on the knowledge that the 
mealybug vectors transmit the virus in a semi-persistent 
manner. That is when the mealybugs acquire the virus 
upon feeding on an infected plant, it looses the virus after 
48 hrs if it does not feed on an infected plant to boost up 
its viral content. So if a barrier of immune crops is planted 
around the replanted cocoa, then before a viruliferous (vi -
 35
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
rus-containing) mealybug can move from an infected plant 
across the barrier into the replanted ones, it would have 
lost the virus and will therefore be harmless. Citrus and Oil 
palm are desirable barrier crops.
                   PHYTOPHTHORA POD ROT DISEASES
PHYTOPHTHORA DISEASES OF COCOA
i. PHYTOPHTHORA POD ROT (BLACK POD) DISEASE
• Phytophthora pod rot (black pod) disease is locally 
either called anonom, asukuo or kokoo pr  y 
• Black pod disease in Ghana is caused by two spe-
cies of fungi, i.e. Phytophthora palmivora (less severe) and 
Phytophthora megakarya (more severe).
• Phytophthora palmivora is less aggressive and 
causes relatively lower crop loss.  Phytophthora megakar -
ya is more aggressive and if not treated or managed, can 
cause entire crop or yield loss in a season.
P. palmivora  P. megakarya
                    SYMPTOMS OF BLACK POD DISEASE
•The initial symptom observed is the appearance of a 
small brown spot (lesion) on the pod surface. The appear -
ance of this brown spot takes about 2-3 days after the in -
fection to manifest. 
•This spot soon turns to a chocolate brown color in 2-3 
days, then darkens and expands rapidly under favourable 
conditions. 
•An infected pod can be covered entirely within 7-14 days 
depending on the species of Phytophthora.
•Within the first five days of infection, whitish spores 
(seeds) are produced on the pod.
•Pod rot symptoms due to P. megakarya are often charac-
terized by multiple spots, which spread fast and coalesce 
(join together).
•Black pod can attack the pod at any stage of its devel -
opment, i.e. from the very young pod (cherelle) to the fully 
matured pod. 
CONDITIONS SUITABLE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
DISEASE
• Phytophthora species are water loving, and there-
fore, conditions that tend to create a humid and damp 
environment favours the development and spread of the 
disease. 
• The fungus thrives in humid and damp environ -
ments, and thus, the disease is mainly prevalent in the wet 
(rainy) season. 
• In dry conditions or seasons, the fungus survives 
in flower cushions,  mummified (dry) pods,  pod husksand 
in the soil. 
SPREAD OF THE BLACK POD DISEASE IN THE COCOA FARM 
OR FIELD
•         The spread in a cocoa farm can be from one pod to 
another or from one tree to the next.
•        The spread 0n the farm is aided by several agents 
or means: 
a.           direct contact with existing infected pods i.e. when 
a healthy pod is in direct contact with an infected one.
b.            rain splash – by rain drops splashing fungal spores 
onto healthy pods or drips of water from an infected pod 
falling directly onto healthy pods. 
c.          soil splash – when pods are in direct contact with 
infected soil or infected soil splashed onto pods or ants 
carrying infected soil or plant debris onto pods through 
building of nests.
d.         insects and rodents can also spread the disease 
through their activities on a farm.
e.           man –through contaminated hands and farm im -
plements to transmit the spores from infected to healthy 
pods.
      CONTROL OF BLACK POD DISEASE
CULTURAL CONTROL
• Judicious reduction of shade; leave 6-9 trees per 
acre (15-20 trees per hectare): this practice increases aera-
tion and reduces canopy humidity, thus reducing sporula -
tion and spread of the disease.
• Regular weeding; weed 2-4 times in a year, de -
pending on whether the canopy has closed   or not: this 
practice increases aeration thus reducing sporulation and 
spread of the disease.
• Judicious pruning and removal of chupons: this 
practice increases aeration and reduces humidity, thus re-
ducing sporulation and spread of the disease.
• Plant at recommended spacing or thin out to the 
recommended spacing (3m x 3m): this practice increases 
aeration and reduces humidity, thus reducing sporulation 
and spread of the disease.
3c
 36
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Current  approved fungicides for cocoa (this list is subject 
to change with time) for black pod disease control, their 
dosage and interval of application is presented in Appen -
dix.Table 13.1.  
              STEM CANKER OF COCOA
It is an important stem disease of cocoa caused by Phy -
tophthora palmivora and Phytophthora megakarya. The 
local name of the disease is “kokoo kokoram” or “kokoo 
ananse”.
WHAT DAMAGE DOES IT DO?
• The growing canker severely affects water and 
nutrient flow to the branches and the tree appears wilted.
• If the canker circles the trunk or branch, the tree 
dies back and the whole tree may lose its leaves.
• Stem cankers reduce tree vigour, destroy flower 
cushions, reduces yield and also provide a source of inocu-
lum for black pod infections. 
HOW DO I IDENTIFY IT? (SYMPTOMS)
• The first sign of canker is often the appearance of 
bark discoloration and exudation of reddish brown, resin -
ous liquid Fig.2.2.9a.
•  When the canker is exposed by removing the 
bark, the wood appears dull and discoloured from cream 
to reddish brown lesion. The wood lesions are irregular in 
shape but well defined in outline Fig.2.2.9b.
• Removal of infected pods during and in between 
harvests: this practice reduces the chances of the fungus 
sporulating and spreading on the farm.
• Removal of infected and mummified pods dur -
ing or in between harvests on trees: the mummified pods 
serve not only as source of inoculum for subsequent infec-
tions but also prevent pods from forming at the cushions 
in the subsequent season. 
• Regular and frequent harvesting (at least once a 
month). This practice saves partly infected mature pods, 
removes infected pods and reduces sources of sporangial 
inoculum and also reduces cushion cankers. At harvest it 
is essential that healthy pods are separated from diseased 
pods to obtain a well fermented cocoa.
• Removal or spraying of pod husk piles where they 
occur on farms. The piles serve as disease foci on farms.
CHEMICAL CONTROL 
• Chemical control is achieved by spraying with 
recommended fungicides (Appendix 2). A fungicide is a 
chemical that is applied to control the growth and spread 
of a fungus. It may be protective or curative in action. 
• Fungicides should only be used when they are re-
ally needed and they should be suitably approved and reg-
istered in Ghana.
• The protectant fungicides when sprayed onto the 
pods form a chemical barrier on the surface of the pod and 
guard against infection whereas the curative fungicides 
are able to penetrate into the pod and arrest the growth of 
the fungus within it.
• Fungicides must also be applied at the recom -
mended rates for safe and effective disease control. 
          o Overdose spray may not only injure the crop but 
it is wasteful. On the other hand, inadequate (underdose) 
spray of fungicide may not give good control, but also, in 
most cases worsen the disease situation. 
• Spray approved fungicides at frequent intervals 
so that protection is provided for the duration of the infec-
tion period.  This routine spraying is necessary because:
         o  part of the fungicide coating on the pod is washed 
off by rain
         o  the fungicide deposit on the surface of the pod 
becomes thin and gaps occur in the coating as the pod 
grows bigger and 
         o new pods also develop in between sprays and 
they need to be protected. 
• Spraying on farms should start when the cocoa 
trees are bearing pods or cherelles (okro stage of pods), 
and it has started raining continuously and b l a c k p o d s 
diseases are imminent.
•  When it is time to start, choose the morning of a 
day when the weather is clear (rain is not threatening) to 
spray. If it rains within 3 hours after spraying you will have 
to spray again. Stop spraying in the season when the rains 
have stopped and/or there are very few pods to protect.
• The number of sachets used per unit area de -
pends on the pod load and it may vary from farm to farm.
       HOW DO I MANAGE STEM CANKER? (CONTROL)
• To reduce canker disease, harvest pods frequently 
to prevent the fungus on pods from growing into the stem 
through the peduncle (pod stalk) to cause canker. 
• If cankers have developed, scrape the surface to 
expose the lesions on the wood to dry out.
• Scraped lesions can be painted with a paste of 
any of the recommended fungicides for black pod disease 
control.
a b
Fig 2.2.9.Symtoms of stem canker
 37
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
HOW TO MANAGE THREAD BLIGHT?
• Prune and remove infected branches from the 
farm. In situations where infestation is persistent, spray 
with recommended fungicide
                                    2.   PINK DISEASE
• Pink disease caused by Erythricium (Corticium) 
salmonicolor affect branches, although the main stems 
could be attacked in the advanced stage of infection. 
(Fig.2.3.3).
• Pinkish encrustations (consisting of millions of 
spores (seeds) appear on the branch.
• Spores of the fungus may be spread by rain 
splash, wound or insects. 
• Penetration of the fungus into the cortex disrupts 
the physiological processes of the tree leading to defolia -
tion, branch dieback and consequently death of the branch 
and sometimes the whole tree.
• If the disease is not managed promptly, infected 
trees may die resulting in open patches on the farm. 
• In Ghana, the symptoms are more evident during 
the dry months of November to March
MINOR DISEASES
         1.   THREAD BLIGHTS OF COCOA
It is a fungal disease of cocoa that affects the branches and 
leaves. There are two types,black thread and white thread. 
Black thread blight is caused by Marasmius byssicola and 
white thread blight is caused by Marasmius scandens.
WHAT DAMAGE DOES IT DO?
• White and black thread kills leaves and this 
reduces yield. 
• In severe situations, the dead foliage which re -
mains suspended on the braches form a dense mass which 
obstructs new flushes.
HOW DO I IDENTIFY IT?
• Black thread blight forms thin black mycelia 
threads on branches and leaves in the canopy (Fig.2.3). 
• White thread forms a network of white mycelia 
threads which spread over the leaves, petioles and branch-
es (Fig.2.3.1). 
• In both cases, the dead foliage remains suspend -
ed by strands of either white mycelia or thin black thread 
and together with healthy leaves, form dense mass which 
obstruct new flushes (Fig.2.3.2). 
CONTROL
• Pink disease is controlled by the removal and burning of 
all infected branches. Affected branches are removed about 
30 cm below the apparent point of infection and burnt im-
mediately. This is followed immediately by spraying the 
pockets on the farm with any of recommended fungicides 
at 3-weekly intervals with motorized spraying machines. 
Fig 2.3 Black thread blight
Fig 2.3.1 White thread blight
Fig 2.3.3 Cocoa tree affected pink disease
Fig 2.3.2 Dead foliage caused by thread blight
 38
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                       5.   MEALY POD
Mealy pod is seen as white powdery spores (seeds) on the 
cocoa pod. Unlike spores due to Phytophthora infection, 
these white powdery spores can easily be blown away by 
wind.
NB: Warty, charcoal and mealy pod diseases are of minor 
importance and do not require any control measures if 
good farm sanitation practices such as thinning, pruning, 
improving drainage and removal of infected trees or pods 
are followed. For charcoal pod also, avoid wounding of the 
pods.
                         3.   WARTY POD
Warty pod (kokoo pcmpc), starts as small protrusions 
(swellings) on green pods. The swellings turn dark brown 
as the pod matures and soft when the pod ripens. These 
dark brown lesions can easily be pressed in with the thumb.
                                4.   CHARCOAL POD ROT
Lasiodiplodia (charcoal) pod rot (kokoo bidie yare3) is char-
acterized by charcoal-like (black) sooty spores. When an 
infected pod is touched, a sooty black powdery substance 
is left on the palm. Charcoal pod rot often results when a 
pod is wounded and this wounding should be avoided dur-
ing weeding and harvesting. 
SUMMARY OF COCOA POD DISEASES
PICTURE SYMPTOM DESCRIPTION CONTROL
   P. palmivora  black pod 
(anonom, asukuo)
Starts as brown spot which become 
darker and expand to cover the entire 
pod within 14 days. Whitish spores 
(seeds) are produced on the brown few 
days after the appearance of the first 
symptom. Often, there are few or no 
whitish spores one cm from the advanc-
ing margin of the lesion.  
Cultural practices but where  in-
cidence is still high, supplement 
cultural practices  with 4-weekly 
spraying of COCOBOD approved 
fungicides
Often starts as many brown spots which 
become darker and expand rapidly to 
cover the entire pod within 7-14 days. 
Relatively more whitish spores (seeds) 
are produced on the brown surface 3 
days after the appearance of the brown 
spot. Spores cannot be blown around by 
wind
Cultural practices supplemented 
with 4-weekly spraying of 
COCOBOD approved fungicides
         Warty pod (kokoo pompo)
Starts as small protrusions (swellings) 
on green pods. The swellings turn dark 
brown and soft when the pod ripens. 
These dark brown lesions can easily
be pressed in with the thumb.
It is of minor importance and does 
not require any control measure
P. megakarya black pod 
(anonom, asukuo)

 39
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
SUMMARY OF COCOA POD DISEASES
PICTURE SYMPTOM DESCRIPTION CONTROL
       Charcoal pod rot 
       (kokoo bidie yare3)
Spores on infected pods are black 
and charcoal-like. When an infected 
pod is touched, a sooty black pow-
dery substance is left on the palm. 
Charcoal pod rot often results when 
a pod is wounded.
It is of minor importance and it is caused 
by opportunistic fungi. Avoid wounding of 
pods during weeding and harvesting. No 
control measure is recommended.
  Mealy pod (Kokoo powder)
Seen as white powdery spores 
(seeds) on the pod. These powdery 
spores can easily be blown away by 
wind
It is of minor importance and does not 
require any control measure
Mistletoes are semi-parasitic plants (Figs 14.1 and 14.2).
They attach to their host from which they obtain moisture 
and nutrients but manufacture their own food because 
they have green leaves. The genus Tapinanthus is the most 
common in Ghana, where they attack many dicotyledon -
ous plants, especially ornamentals, forest and fruit trees. 
Mistletoes now cause considerable damage to cocoa farms 
and under heavy infestation can lead to complete destruc-
tion of the farmMistletoes can infest almost every dicoty -
ledonous tree and most permanent shade trees on cocoa 
farms are first infested from which  cocoa is later infested.
Tapinanthus bangwensis , which is the predominant 
species in cocoa farms, takes about 9-12 months from 
the day of germination to mature and flower. In Ghana, 
T.bangwensis flowers twice in a year (i.e. March/April and 
July/August). Mistletoes produce seeds that are embed -
ded in sticky pulps. This condition coupled with the brightly 
coloured flowers and fruits attract birds, which aid in their 
dispersal.
3.10.2   MISTLETOES AND OTHER EPIPHYTES
CONTROL
Several types of control strategies had been tried or 
tested. These include preventive, cultural, chemical 
and biological. 
PREVENTIVE
Well maintained cocoa farms will prevent or mini -
mise mistletoe attack. Having shade trees in the 
cocoa farm will also prevent or reduce attack.
CULTURAL 
Removal or cutting-off infected branch as soon as it 
is notice will stop spread. It is important to identify 
infestation early enough since delay in detection will 
give mistletoe time to develop flowers and the sticky 
fruits, which are difficult to control. 
Fig 14.1:  (a)  Tapinanthus 
bangwensis
Fig 14.2: (b) Phragman -
theraincana  
ba
 40
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE 
SYMPTOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL 
There are four 
main spices of 
Mirids on cocoa in 
Ghana. There are 
three important 
ones mainly the 
brown mirid the 
black mirid and 
the cocoa mos -
quito
Mirids cause 
damage to seed -
lings, cherelles 
and shoots by 
sucking the sap 
from their symp -
toms.
Feeding puncture 
marks appear as 
water-soaked 
patches that 
turn black af -
ter 2-3 days. 
On young pods 
these are usu -
ally black, round 
lesions near the 
stalk facing the 
trunk and stems 
can cause split 
(cankers) and die 
back.
They are found 
throughout the 
year especially dur -
ing August to April.
Inspect cocoa 
plants up to hand 
height monthly for 
the presence of 
mirids and feed -
ing lesions on pods 
and shoots
Inspect broken 
canopies for mirids 
and lesions on 
fresh chupons.
Damage on mature 
pods over three 
months old is not 
important but 
spray when aver -
age numbers reach 
6 mirids per 10 
trees 
Plant tolerant hybrids 
(commonly called 
mixed) from COCO -
BOD authorized seed 
gardens.
Remove chupons as 
they are succulent 
and attractive both as 
feeding and egg-lay -
ing sites for mirids.
Remove alternative 
host plants such as 
young silk cotton 
trees and kola (Cola 
spp)
Maintain continuous 
but well pruned cano -
py allows sunlight to 
reach the forest floor 
and promotes fresh 
chupons (new shoots)
which attracts mirids. 
If the cocoa canopy is 
broken replace dead 
trees or plant plantain 
as it grows quickly 
and closes the canopy 
As a last resort approved pesticides 
(miricides) may be applied using 
motorized mistblower (for mature 
cocoa) or pneumatic lever operated 
(for young cocoa) on monthly basis 
from August to December omitting 
November 
at peak season. 
Limited spraying can be carried 
out in January to July when mirid 
numbers and damage is high. In 
this case 2 applications at monthly 
intervals of infested areas or mirid 
pockets can
be carried out.
Pesticides listed below and others in 
(Appendix 3) are approved for use on 
cocoa as 
miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametox -
am) at a rate of 17ml/11 
litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litres or 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 
litres or 500 ml/ha
Black mirid 
(Distantiellatheobroma)
Feeding lesions on chupons 
caused by mirids
Brown mirid 
(Sahlbergellasingularis)
COCOA MIRIDS (CAPSIDS) AKATE IN AKAN
Cocoa mosquito 
(Helopeltisspp)
Pod damage by mirids
Brown mirid 
(Sahlbergellasingularis)
                3.10.3   MANAGEMENT OF COCOA PESTS 
   
INTRODUCTION
Cocoa is attacked by major and minor insect pests. 
The major ones are Cocoa mirids, Stink bugs and 
Cocoa Stem borers. The minor ones are Leaf defoliators/  
Skeletonisers, Termites, Grasshoppers,  Aphids, Pod bor -
ers, and psyllids. Others include Rodents such as African 
giant pouched rats and Mice.
 41
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE 
SYMPTOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL 
There are four 
main spices of 
Mirids on cocoa in 
Ghana. There are 
three important 
ones mainly the 
brown mirid the 
black mirid and 
the cocoa mos -
quito
Mirids cause 
damage to seed -
lings, cherelles 
and shoots by 
sucking the sap 
from their symp -
toms.
Feeding puncture 
marks appear as 
water-soaked 
patches that 
turn black af -
ter 2-3 days. 
On young pods 
these are usu -
ally black, round 
lesions near the 
stalk facing the 
trunk and stems 
can cause split 
(cankers) and die 
back.
They are found 
throughout the 
year especially dur -
ing August to April.
Inspect cocoa 
plants up to hand 
height monthly for 
the presence of 
mirids and feed -
ing lesions on pods 
and shoots
Inspect broken 
canopies for mirids 
and lesions on 
fresh chupons.
Damage on mature 
pods over three 
months old is not 
important but 
spray when aver -
age numbers reach 
6 mirids per 10 
trees 
Plant tolerant hybrids 
(commonly called 
mixed) from COCO -
BOD authorized seed 
gardens.
Remove chupons as 
they are succulent 
and attractive both as 
feeding and egg-lay -
ing sites for mirids.
Remove alternative 
host plants such as 
young silk cotton 
trees and kola (Cola 
spp)
Maintain continuous 
but well pruned cano -
py allows sunlight to 
reach the forest floor 
and promotes fresh 
chupons (new shoots)
which attracts mirids. 
If the cocoa canopy is 
broken replace dead 
trees or plant plantain 
as it grows quickly 
and closes the canopy 
As a last resort approved pesticides 
(miricides) may be applied using 
motorized mistblower (for mature 
cocoa) or pneumatic lever operated 
(for young cocoa) on monthly basis 
from August to December omitting 
November 
at peak season. 
Limited spraying can be carried 
out in January to July when mirid 
numbers and damage is high. In 
this case 2 applications at monthly 
intervals of infested areas or mirid 
pockets can
be carried out.
Pesticides listed below and others in 
(Appendix 3) are approved for use on 
cocoa as 
miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametox -
am) at a rate of 17ml/11 
litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litres or 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 
litres or 500 ml/ha
 42
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMPTOMS MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
In the past information on 
the cocoa stem borer (Eu -
lophonotusmyrmeleon )did 
not portray it as an impor -
tant pest (Cotterell,1928; 
Alibert, 1951;Entwistle, 
1962, 1972).
The borer now poses a 
serious threat to cocoa 
in Ghana (Padi and Adu -
Acheampong, 1998; 2001) 
and in Togo (Gnakpenuo et 
al, 1996; Wegbe et al, 1997).
Entwistle et al (1959) sug -
gested that borer outbreaks 
resulted from intensive 
spraying of insecticides 
against mirids.
The young larva bores into 
stems of both young and 
mature cocoa.
Damage to the stem is as a 
result of the larva feeding 
inside the stem producing 
a  excreted material looking 
like saw-dust(frass) at the 
base of cocoa stem and/
or gummy exudates from 
entry and exit holes made 
by the larva (caterpillar) in 
the stem. 
They are found 
throughout the year 
especially during 
August to April.
Inspect cocoa plants 
up to hand height 
monthly for the 
entry holes and the 
presence of excreta 
at the base of cocoa 
produced by the 
larva
Observe good 
cultural practices 
including intercrop -
ping with legumes 
at early field estab -
lishment.
Remove alterna -
t i v e  host plants  
o f  A n acadaiaceae 
family or old cocoa 
trees from mori -
bund farms from 
surrounding fields 
since they may 
habour
Exit holes can be sealed 
with wooden plugs or cot -
ton wool impregnated with 
COCOBOD  approved insec -
ticides.
Pesticides listed below and 
others in  (Appendix3)  are 
approved for use on cocoa 
as stem borers: 
• Actara 240 SC 
(Thiamethoxam) at a 
rateof 17ml/11 litres or 
85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 
30ml/11 litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 
100ml/11 litresor 500 ml/
ha
Adult female stem borer on a 
stem of cocoa
Larva (Caterpilar) of cocoa stem borer
Exit hole created by the caterpillar of the 
borer on a matured cocoa tree Stem borer exit holeplugged with a twig as 
control
COCOA STEM BORER (KOOKOOA KOKONO) IN AKAN (EULOPHONOTUSMYRMELEON)

 43
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMPTOMS MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
In the past information on 
the cocoa stem borer (Eu -
lophonotusmyrmeleon )did 
not portray it as an impor -
tant pest (Cotterell,1928; 
Alibert, 1951;Entwistle, 
1962, 1972).
The borer now poses a 
serious threat to cocoa 
in Ghana (Padi and Adu -
Acheampong, 1998; 2001) 
and in Togo (Gnakpenuo et 
al, 1996; Wegbe et al, 1997).
Entwistle et al (1959) sug -
gested that borer outbreaks 
resulted from intensive 
spraying of insecticides 
against mirids.
The young larva bores into 
stems of both young and 
mature cocoa.
Damage to the stem is as a 
result of the larva feeding 
inside the stem producing 
a  excreted material looking 
like saw-dust(frass) at the 
base of cocoa stem and/
or gummy exudates from 
entry and exit holes made 
by the larva (caterpillar) in 
the stem. 
They are found 
throughout the year 
especially during 
August to April.
Inspect cocoa plants 
up to hand height 
monthly for the 
entry holes and the 
presence of excreta 
at the base of cocoa 
produced by the 
larva
Observe good 
cultural practices 
including intercrop -
ping with legumes 
at early field estab -
lishment.
Remove alterna -
t i v e  host plants  
o f  A n acadaiaceae 
family or old cocoa 
trees from mori -
bund farms from 
surrounding fields 
since they may 
habour
Exit holes can be sealed 
with wooden plugs or cot -
ton wool impregnated with 
COCOBOD  approved insec -
ticides.
Pesticides listed below and 
others in  (Appendix3)  are 
approved for use on cocoa 
as stem borers: 
• Actara 240 SC 
(Thiamethoxam) at a 
rateof 17ml/11 litres or 
85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 
30ml/11 litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 
100ml/11 litresor 500 ml/
ha
 44
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMP -
TOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND RESTRIC -
TIONS
•Both adult and 
nymph feed on the 
pod only. 
They suck the con -
tent of the beans. 
If the pod is young, 
it stops growing 
as soon as several 
beans have been 
damaged. 
Pods attacked by 
stink bugs turn 
yellow, then brown 
and finally black. 
They are found 
throughout the 
year especially 
during August to 
April.
Inspect cocoa 
plants up to hand 
height monthly 
for the pres -
ence adults and 
nymphs stink 
bugs on pods and 
shoots.
Look out for pre -
mature yellowing 
of cherelles and 
pods
Remove alternative 
host plants such as 
young silk cotton trees, 
legumes andgrasses.
Maintain continuous 
but well pruned canopy 
allows sunlight to reach 
the forest floor and 
promotes fresh chupon 
(new shoots) which may 
attract sucking insects. 
If the cocoa canopy is 
broken replace dead 
trees or plant plantain 
as it grows quickly and 
closes the canopy.
COCOBOD  approved insecticides for the 
control of cocoa mirids can be used to 
manage B. thalassina.
Pesticides listed below and others in 
(Appendix 3)  are approved for use on 
cocoa as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametoxam) at 
a 
rate of 17ml/11 litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litres or 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 litres 
or 500 ml/ha
Adult stink bugNymph stink bug
Premature ripening of cocoa pod
Feeding hole made 
by stink bug
STINK OR SHIELD BUGS - ATEE IN AKAN (BATHYCOELIA THALLASINA)

 45
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMP -
TOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND RESTRIC -
TIONS
•Both adult and 
nymph feed on the 
pod only. 
They suck the con -
tent of the beans. 
If the pod is young, 
it stops growing 
as soon as several 
beans have been 
damaged. 
Pods attacked by 
stink bugs turn 
yellow, then brown 
and finally black. 
They are found 
throughout the 
year especially 
during August to 
April.
Inspect cocoa 
plants up to hand 
height monthly 
for the pres -
ence adults and 
nymphs stink 
bugs on pods and 
shoots.
Look out for pre -
mature yellowing 
of cherelles and 
pods
Remove alternative 
host plants such as 
young silk cotton trees, 
legumes andgrasses.
Maintain continuous 
but well pruned canopy 
allows sunlight to reach 
the forest floor and 
promotes fresh chupon 
(new shoots) which may 
attract sucking insects. 
If the cocoa canopy is 
broken replace dead 
trees or plant plantain 
as it grows quickly and 
closes the canopy.
COCOBOD  approved insecticides for the 
control of cocoa mirids can be used to 
manage B. thalassina.
Pesticides listed below and others in 
(Appendix 3)  are approved for use on 
cocoa as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametoxam) at 
a 
rate of 17ml/11 litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litres or 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 litres 
or 500 ml/ha
 46
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE 
SYMPTOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND RESTRIC -
TIONS
The larva eats 
leaves, green 
stems and 
the outside of 
unripe pods. It 
is common at 
the beginning 
of the rains 
(March – June). 
Feeding does 
not result in 
loss of beans 
and the pests 
are usually 
not controlled. 
However seri -
ous outbreaks 
of the pest 
must be man -
aged.
On the unset of 
the rains look 
out for window -
ing of flushes and 
tender parts of 
cocoa including 
cherelles. 
Assess the spread 
and numbers of 
caterpillars and 
intervene if dam -
age  is potentially 
possible
Remove chupons 
regularly to reduce the 
attraction for egg laying 
of adult lepidopters.
COCOBOD  approved insecticides
for the control of cocoa mirids 
can be used to manage B. thalassina.
Pesticides listed below and others 
in (Appendix 3)  are approved for 
use on cocoa as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametoxam) at 
a rateof 17ml/11 litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 
litresor 500 ml/ha
LEAF DEFOLIATORS/SKELETONIZERS
(CATERPILLARS OF LEPIDOPTERA SPP I.E ANOMIS AND EARIAS SPP)
Eariasspp
Damage of flushes by the caterpillars
Anomisspp

 47
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE 
SYMPTOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND RESTRIC -
TIONS
The larva eats 
leaves, green 
stems and 
the outside of 
unripe pods. It 
is common at 
the beginning 
of the rains 
(March – June). 
Feeding does 
not result in 
loss of beans 
and the pests 
are usually 
not controlled. 
However seri -
ous outbreaks 
of the pest 
must be man -
aged.
On the unset of 
the rains look 
out for window -
ing of flushes and 
tender parts of 
cocoa including 
cherelles. 
Assess the spread 
and numbers of 
caterpillars and 
intervene if dam -
age  is potentially 
possible
Remove chupons 
regularly to reduce the 
attraction for egg laying 
of adult lepidopters.
COCOBOD  approved insecticides
for the control of cocoa mirids 
can be used to manage B. thalassina.
Pesticides listed below and others 
in (Appendix 3)  are approved for 
use on cocoa as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thiametoxam) at 
a rateof 17ml/11 litres or 85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 30ml/11 
litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 100ml/11 
litresor 500 ml/ha
 48
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
OTHER MINOR INSECT PESTS OF COCOA
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMPTOMS MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
Termite is an important 
pest at the nursery and 
establishment stages of 
cocoa.
Their damage is most com -
mon in the dry season.
Termites are 
usually under -
ground pests 
whose presence 
can be detected 
by the presence 
of run ways 
(often covered) 
along healthy-
looking stem.
Mulching in termite 
endemic areas must be 
avoided unless chemical 
control of termites is also 
intended. This is because 
moist conditions created 
by mulching invite termite 
pests to the seedling/
young cocoa tree.
It is also advisable 
to keep general farm 
hygiene. Cocobod approved insec -
ticides for the control of 
cocoa mirids can be used 
to manage all other pests 
listed:
Pesticides listed below and 
others in (Appendix 3)  are 
approved for use on cocoa 
as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thia -
metoxam) at a 
rateof 17ml/11 litres or 
85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 
30ml/11 
litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 
100ml/11 
litresor 500 ml/ha
(A) Grasshoppersare also 
defoliators and common at 
the beginning of the rains 
(March – June). 
Feeding does not result 
in loss of beans and it is 
usually not controlled but 
serious outbreaks must be 
managed.
(B) Aphids are insects which 
suck sap from leaves or 
stems of plants
          
                All year round  monitoring 
                is encourage
(C) It is a moth whose larva 
is the destructive stage. 
It bores into pods and pro -
duces frass held together 
by silk at the entrance of 
the holes.
 
Damage to matured pods 
do not affect the beans 
since it is only on the pod 
surface, but young and soft 
cherelles may wilt and die if 
attacked
(D) Psyllids suck sap from 
leaves or stems of plants
Termites (White ants) 
Isoptera :Termitidae
(A) Variegated grasshopper  
(Zonocerus variegates)
(C) Pod Borer  (Characomastritigrapha)
(B) Aphids  (Toxopteraaurantii)
(D) Psyllids  (Tyoratessmanni)
 49
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMPTOMS MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
Termite is an important 
pest at the nursery and 
establishment stages of 
cocoa.
Their damage is most com -
mon in the dry season.
Termites are 
usually under -
ground pests 
whose presence 
can be detected 
by the presence 
of run ways 
(often covered) 
along healthy-
looking stem.
Mulching in termite 
endemic areas must be 
avoided unless chemical 
control of termites is also 
intended. This is because 
moist conditions created 
by mulching invite termite 
pests to the seedling/
young cocoa tree.
It is also advisable 
to keep general farm 
hygiene. Cocobod approved insec -
ticides for the control of 
cocoa mirids can be used 
to manage all other pests 
listed:
Pesticides listed below and 
others in (Appendix 3)  are 
approved for use on cocoa 
as miricides: 
• Actara 240 SC (Thia -
metoxam) at a 
rateof 17ml/11 litres or 
85ml/ha
• Confidor OD
(imidacloprid) at a rate of 
30ml/11 
litresor 150ml/ha
• AkateMaster
(Bifenthrin) at a rate of 
100ml/11 
litresor 500 ml/ha
(A) Grasshoppersare also 
defoliators and common at 
the beginning of the rains 
(March – June). 
Feeding does not result 
in loss of beans and it is 
usually not controlled but 
serious outbreaks must be 
managed.
(B) Aphids are insects which 
suck sap from leaves or 
stems of plants
          
                All year round  monitoring 
                is encourage
(C) It is a moth whose larva 
is the destructive stage. 
It bores into pods and pro -
duces frass held together 
by silk at the entrance of 
the holes.
 
Damage to matured pods 
do not affect the beans 
since it is only on the pod 
surface, but young and soft 
cherelles may wilt and die if 
attacked
(D) Psyllids suck sap from 
leaves or stems of plants
 50
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
RODENT PESTS OF COCOA (RATS, SQUIRRELS AND MICE) (OKUSIE, OPURO AND  AKURA IN AKAN)
African Pouch Giant Rat (Cricetomys gambianus) 
squirels
Rodent damage to cocoa pod
Mouse
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMP -
TOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
Larger bodied species 
such as the African 
Pouch Giant Rat (Cri -
cetomys gambianus)  
can take a whole pod 
and beans.
Small ones such as 
squirels and mice 
may feed only on the 
mucilage that sur -
rounds the beans.
The proportion of 
holed pods can be 
very high and they 
become increasingly 
susceptible to dam -
age as they ripen. 
Average loses from 
rodents is estimated 
at 8.2% (Everard 
1964). 
Damage is com -
pounded by ensuing 
fungal infection and 
affected pods are all 
lost.
Damage may occur 
throughout the year but 
increases steeply when 
pods ripen.
Persistent widespread 
damage is likely near 
to borders with crops 
that support rodents (oil 
palm, rice etc)
Several species of 
squirrels (Paraxerus -
poensis, Holomyscuss -
tella, Praomystullbergi, 
Stochomyslongicau -
datus) are the main 
culprits involved in pod 
damage
Cocoa grown under 
coconut or oil palm is 
highly susceptible to 
attack by rodents.
Culling (direct killing of 
existing Pests) through 
trapping and  baiting
with rodenticide
Rodenticides listed below 
are appropriatefor use to 
manage rodents in the field 
and in storage structures.
Brodifacoum, Bromodialone 
etc
 51
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
IMAGE DAMAGE SYMP -
TOMS
MONITORING PREVENTION DIRECT CONTROL AND 
RESTRICTIONS
Larger bodied species 
such as the African 
Pouch Giant Rat (Cri -
cetomys gambianus)  
can take a whole pod 
and beans.
Small ones such as 
squirels and mice 
may feed only on the 
mucilage that sur -
rounds the beans.
The proportion of 
holed pods can be 
very high and they 
become increasingly 
susceptible to dam -
age as they ripen. 
Average loses from 
rodents is estimated 
at 8.2% (Everard 
1964). 
Damage is com -
pounded by ensuing 
fungal infection and 
affected pods are all 
lost.
Damage may occur 
throughout the year but 
increases steeply when 
pods ripen.
Persistent widespread 
damage is likely near 
to borders with crops 
that support rodents (oil 
palm, rice etc)
Several species of 
squirrels (Paraxerus -
poensis, Holomyscuss -
tella, Praomystullbergi, 
Stochomyslongicau -
datus) are the main 
culprits involved in pod 
damage
Cocoa grown under 
coconut or oil palm is 
highly susceptible to 
attack by rodents.
Culling (direct killing of 
existing Pests) through 
trapping and  baiting
with rodenticide
Rodenticides listed below 
are appropriatefor use to 
manage rodents in the field 
and in storage structures.
Brodifacoum, Bromodialone 
etc
 52
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
where the cocoa swollen shoot virus disease, is absent. 
It involves the use of any technique to bring an unpro -
ductive cocoa tree back to high productivity.  It may in -
volve the selective removal of chupons, coppicing of the 
old cocoa stem and grafting or budding of chupons with 
improved material (canopy substitution),removal of mis -
tletoe and moss, pruning to ensure the rapid recovery 
of unproductive trees and control of pests and diseases. 
Canopy substituted farms establish well with very low 
mortality and attain economic yields earlier than farms 
established with seedlings. 
Canopy substitution also produce more uniform plant 
stand in terms of tree sizes, crown shapes and tree 
production. This reduces tree to tree variations and en -
hances reduction of unproductive trees thereby allow -
ing for quick re-grafting of unsuccessful plants for rapid 
growth.
                3.11  REHABILITATION 
 
COCOA REHABILITATION  
Rehabilitation of cocoa refers to the process of bring -
ing back the productivity of old, moribund or unproduc -
tive cocoa farm which has been affected by the pest and 
disease attack, neglect, decline in soil fertility or lack of 
appropriate shade cover.  Three models are available for 
rehabilitation of cocoa farms but the suitability of each 
will depend on the local situation.  These models are:
• underplanting of cocoa
• complete replanting / re-establishment of 
 cocoa
• rejuvenation/coppicing of the cocoa trees.
UNDER-PLANTING OF COCOA
Under-planting is carried out in areas where the cocoa 
swollen shoot virus disease is absent and when the co -
coa tree stock is old or when the trees are suffering from 
pest attack. Improved cocoa seedlings are planted at the 
recommended spacing underneath the canopy of the 
older trees which serve as shade. In cases where death 
of the old trees has created significant gaps in the co -
coa farm, it may be necessary to plant food crops or fast 
growing trees such as Gliricidia in the gaps and then 
cocoa seedlings planted to fill the gaps. As the planted 
cocoa matures the old trees are progressively thinned to 
reduce the shade provided.   Weed, insect pest and dis -
ease management are carried out as and when needed.  
This model allows the farmer to maintain certain level 
of income from the old cocoa tree stock while the young 
cocoa seedlings matures to take over.  The disadvantage 
associated with this system of rehabilitation is the risk 
of possible infection of the new trees with diseases and 
pests.
COMPLETE REPLANTING/REESTABLISHMENT OF COCOA
This is highly recommended in areas of cocoa swollen 
shoot disease infection.  Under this model all old cocoa 
trees are cut down and the plot prepared for re-planting 
with improved varieties as in the case of establishment 
of a new farm.  After cutting down the old trees, the land 
may be used immediately for re-establishment of cocoa 
provided the old cocoa stumps are killed with arboricide. 
This prevents the growth of cocoa chupons that could 
facilitate the transmission of the cocoa swollen shoot 
disease. When replanting is to be done, the land should 
be lined and pegged, and Giricidia and food crops planted 
to provide temporary shade for the new cocoa. A demerit 
of this model is that the farmer loses income from cocoa 
until the new ones start bearing.
REJUVENATION OF COCOA
As in the case of under-planting, this system is practised 
      i .   HARVESTING
Generally, there are two crop seasons of cocoa within a 
year, the main crop in October-March and the mid-crop 
in May-August. During the harvesting season, harvesting 
is done every 3-4 weeks when the pods are ripe and yel -
low in colour. It is done by cutting the stalk of the fruit 
with a knife as close as possible to the pod in order not to 
cause injury to the tree. Pods within reach are harvested 
with a cutlass whilst those on branches further away are 
harvested with sickle-shaped knives on long poles (Fig 
16.1). Extreme care should be taken during harvesting to 
ensure that the cushions carrying the flowers and fruits 
are not damaged. During harvesting, diseased pods and 
those damaged by rodents, are also removed. The healthy 
pods are then carried to a central breaking point (Fig 16.2). 
At the end of harvesting, pod breaking operations begin.  
3.12   GOOD HARVESTING AND POST 
HARVEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Fig 16.1: Harvesting and picking of cocoa
 53
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
    iii.   FERMENTATION
The beans are embedded in a sweet, white mucilaginous 
pulp, which serves as a substrate for fermentation (Fig 
…..). Raw cocoa has an astringent and unpleasant flavour 
and must be processed after harvest into good-tasting 
and good-flavour chocolate. Fermentation is done the 
same day the pods are broken. The importance of cocoa 
fermentation is to develop chocolate precursors in the 
bean. The cocoa bean itself does not undergo fermenta -
tion but the pulp surrounding it. The pulp in an undam -
aged pod is microbially sterile. However, it gets contami -
nated during pod breaking with microorganisms from the 
surrounding environment including pod surfaces, knives 
and workers’ hands. 
Cocoa fermentation is a spontaneous process and occurs 
in two stages. The first stage is the fermentation of sug -
ars in the pulp surrounding the beans to alcohol and then 
to acetic acid.
In the second stage, the acetic acid produced penetrates 
the bean to trigger biochemical reactions that are re -
sponsible for the formation of chocolate flavour precur -
sors. Fermentation is normally done in six days and it is 
caused by microbial succession. Microorganisms involved 
in fermentation are yeasts, lactic acid bacteria and ace -
tobacter.
Anaerobic phase (stage 1)
This occurs within the first two days when the pulp does 
not allow air circulation. Yeast and lactic acid bacteria 
fermentations occur in this phase. Yeast fermentation 
transforms pulp sugar into alcohol resulting in an 
increase in temperature. The increase in temperature 
favours the growth of lactic acid bacteria which produce 
lactic acid. The pulp then breaks down, drains away and 
air penetrates the beans.
Aerobic phase (stage 2)
This occurs from day three onwards and aeration allows 
strong growth of acetobacter which transform alcohol 
to acetic acid. Temperature then increases up to 50o C. 
Acetic acid penetrates into the bean causing the 
formation of chocolate flavour precursors. At the end 
of fermentation the temperature reduces causing the 
growth of putrefaction bacteria and prolonged fermentation 
will result in the development of hammy, off-flavour typical 
of over-fermented cocoa.
         METHODS OF FERMENTATION
There are four methods of fermentation. They are the 
heap, basket, box and tray methods but the most 
commonly used are the heap, basket and box methods. 
      ii.   POD BREAKING
Pod breaking is done by cutting the pods open using blunt 
cutlasses or wooden clubs (Fig 16.3).  However, wooden 
clubs are recommended as cutlasses may injure the beans 
inside the pod. The beans are scooped out of the broken 
pod by hand whilst the husk and placenta are discarded. 
All black and germinated beans as well as other foreign 
materials are also disposed off. Pod breaking should be 
done within 2-3 days after harvest. Germinated, black or 
diseased beans or pieces of husk and placenta fragments 
must be removed from the scooped beans. Because the 
flavour of the end product (Chocolate) is affected.
Fig 16.2: Heaped cocoa pods at a 
central breaking point (fermentary)
Fig 16.3: Breaking of cocoa pods
Fig 16.4: Broken pods showing fresh beans with 
sugary pulp
 54
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
b.   BASKET FERMENTATION
This method, like the heap method, is very simple and 
used on small-holder farms. There is no definite size for 
the baskets but it should contain about 10-150 kg wet 
beans. The baskets are first lined with fresh plantain 
leaves before placing the wet beans in them (Fig 16.7). 
They are then covered with more leaves which are held 
in place with small logs (Fig 16.8). The sweatings drain 
from the sides and the bottom of the baskets and air also 
passes through the sides and the bottom. The fermenting 
mass is turned by transferring the beans from one basket 
to the other.
a.   HEAP FERMENTATION
This method is the simplest and normally used on small 
farms. It is done by spreading out fresh plantain leaves 
in a circle on the ground and heaping fresh cocoa beans 
on them (Fig 16.5). This allows easy pulp drainage. The 
heap of beans is then covered with more leaves and held 
in place by small logs (Fig 16.6 a,b). The cover protects the 
fermenting beans against mould growth and also helps 
to maintain the heat generated within the heap. Size of 
the fermenting heap varies from 300 kg to 2 tonnes.
Fig 16.5: Fresh beans heaped on plantain leaves
Fig 16.6: Covered heap
Fig 16.6: Covering the heap
Fig 16.7: Fresh beans heaped in basket
Fig 16.8: Covered beans in basket
 55
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
c.  BOX FERMENTATION 
This is done in large, perforated boxes made of local 
hardwood. The holes at the bottom of the boxes allow 
the sweating from the pulp to drain out and air to enter. 
Therefore, the boxes are always raised above the ground 
level and placed over a drain. The boxes are normally ar -
ranged in tiers so that turning is done by moving beans 
from a higher box to a lower one Fig 16.9). The size of 
the box should be large enough to take 1000 kg wet 
beans (1.2 x 1.2 x 1.2 m). The beans are placed in the top 
box and covered with few layers of plantain leaves. This 
method reduces labour in turning beans. 
To facilitate uniform fermentation in the above methods, 
beans are turned after 48 hours and second turning is 
done after another 48 hours. Fermentation is allowed to 
continue for another 48 hours or until the temperature 
begins to fall and the odour of ammonia develops, when 
the fermentation can be considered to have completed. 
Fermentation usually lasts between 5-7 days but the 
optimal time is 6 days.
Fig 16.9: Wooden box for fermentation
Fig 16.10: Fresh beans in wooden trays
Fig 16.11: Covered beans in trays
d.   TRAY FERMENTATION  
This is done by placing about 90 kg wet beans in wood -
en trays of 1.2 x 0.9 x 0.1 m size. The trays have bat -
tens or reapers fixed at the bottom. About 6-12 of such 
trays are stacked one over the other with an empty tray 
kept at the bottom to allow for aeration and drainage 
of sweating (Fig 16.10). Beans in the topmost tray are 
covered with banana leaves (Fig 16.11).After 24 hours of 
setting the stacked trays, they are covered with gunny 
sacks to conserve the heat that develops within the tray. 
There is no need for turning. Fermentation is completed 
in 3-5 days.
GET PICSGET PICS
 56
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
               FACTORS AFFECTING FERMENTATION
These include the type of cocoa, ripeness of pods, pod 
storage before breaking, quantity of beans and pulp 
during fermentation, duration of fermentation, turning 
of fermenting mass, seasonal effects/climate and dis -
eases that affect pods. 
Over-ripening of pods can cause germination of beans. 
Harvesting immature, diseased and damaged pods 
produces poor quality beans for fermentation. The time 
between harvesting and pod breaking affects fermen -
tation and ultimate bean quality. Storing the pods for 
more than six days causes the pulp surrounding the 
beans to dry up. Pulp and beans can contain more 
water during the wet seasons and too much pulp af -
fects aeration of the fermenting mass and bean acidity. 
Turning aerates the fermenting mass to avoid uneven 
temperature and oxygen distribution.
                        iv.  DRYING OF COCOA
At the end of fermentation, drying begins. It is done 
the same day fermentation ends. Drying is the reduc -
tion of moisture in fermented beans from about 55% to 
7.5%. After fermentation, the beans are carried to the 
drying area and spread thinly on raised mats (Fig 16.12 
a,b). These mats ensure uniform drying; and drying 
should not be done on the bare floor or asphalt roads. 
The beans must be stirred frequently to pick out germi -
nated, flat and black beans, placenta and foreign mate -
rials, There are two methods of drying – sun drying and 
mechanical drying. 
Sun drying is best for good quality beans and this is 
because during sun drying  which is slow, acetic acid, 
a volatile compound, evaporates through the shells, 
Lactic acid, which is a non-volatile compound, is partly 
transported by water from the bean to the shell. There 
is also the oxidation (browning) of polyphenols result -
ing in the reduction of astringency and bitterness. More 
flavour forming reactions also occur during sun drying. 
Mechanical drying is generally not recommended be -
cause it is expensive; there is the danger of smoke 
contamination and high acid retention in beans. During 
drying the beans are covered to protect them from the 
rains and every evening to protect them from possible 
showers and dew. When it rains during the day, cover 
the beans to protect them from the rains. Uncover the 
beans early in the morning or after immediately af -
ter the rains. The beans are dry when they produce a 
‘cracking’ sound after pressing them lightly in the fist. 
Do not stop drying until the beans are well dried. The 
minimum period of drying is 7 days. Fire should not be 
made under or close to the beans during drying as it 
will give the beans a bad taste or smell. The fresh bean 
to dry bean weight ratio is 3:1. Well fermented and well 
dried beans are brown in colour.
Fig 16.12: Drying of cocoa beans
Cocoa quality is determined by the following factors:
• flavour 
• purity or wholesomeness
• consistency/uniformity
• yield of dry nib and functional potential
These have a direct bearing on manufacturing of the 
end product.
Quality characteristic of cocoa is influenced by the cli -
matic conditions, composition of the soil, and the ge -
netic make-up of planting materials used.  Farmers, 
however are naturally constrained by the choice of soil 
and the environmental conditions on their farms. The 
choice of planting material is also dictated by diversity 
of cocoa varieties available to them. Nonetheless, once 
planting is done, there are a lot the farmer can do in 
terms of pre-harvest and post- harvest practices to 
ensure high quality of the beans.  Additionally, all the 
other players along the value chain can perform sig -
nificant roles to maintain or ensure the quality of the 
beans.
3.13    COCOA QUALITY AND ITS ESTIMATION
 57
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Cocoa beans sold at LBC facility
Temporary storage at LBC facility
try Regulations, 1968. The regulation stipulates that 
after removal from the farm, cocoa shall be stored in 
a building and the occupier thereof shall ensure that:
• Building is rainproof 
• Its floors are dry and properly constructed of 
cement concrete, stone, brick or wood
• It is provided with sufficient doors and win -
dows to allow adequate ventilation and
• The inside walls are painted or whitewashed 
and re-painted or re-whitewashed annually or at such 
other period as specified  by Quality Control Company 
of Ghana Cocoa Board.  
Cocoa from the LBCs’ agents’ facility is moved to LBCs’ 
depot where bulking and sieving of stocks from the 
same society is done.  After bulking, the produce is 
packed or stacked in terms of category with reference 
to bean sizes.  The depots are bigger facilities that 
had been certified by QCC for having satisfied the re -
quirements for storage of cocoa. The storage facilities 
(Warehouses) at the Take Over Centres (TOCs) are also 
bigger than those upcountry (depots and stores).
     
                  GOOD WAREHOUSING PRACTICES
Packing/stacking of cocoa is done on wooden pallets 
usually in lots with alleyways in between the stacks 
as well as stacks and the walls, except for special stor -
age facilities like Kateon Natie (bulk cocoa shipping 
company in Takoradi) where the beans are heaped on 
specialised bare floor that will not allow dampness and 
contamination.  Only well dried cocoa beans (moisture 
content of 7.5% or less) should be accepted into stor -
age.   Cocoa should never be kept on the bare floor or 
against the wall. 
In addition to the provisions in  the Cocoa Industry 
Regulations, 1968, the storage facility should be well 
illuminated to allow for thorough inspection of the pro -
duce hence, the use of transparent roofing sheets if 
need be. 
Controlled ventilation helps to prevent build -up of hu -
midity which eventually leads to dampness of cocoa 
There is an international standard for the assessment 
of cocoa bean quality which stipulates that cocoa of 
merchantable quality must be;
• well fermented and thoroughly dry
• free from smoky beans and abnormal or 
 foreign odours 
• Free from evidence of adulteration
• reasonably free from living insects
• Uniform in size
• Free from broken beans, fragments, pieces of  
 shell, and be virtually free from foreign matter.
         PACKAGING AND STORAGE OF COCOA BEANS
PACKAGING
Cocoa beans should be packaged in clean bags, which 
are sufficiently strong and properly sewn or sealed. The 
bags should be made of non-toxic materials, preferably 
food grade vegetable oil treated jute bags.  To ensure 
that good quality bags are used, Ghana Cocoa Board 
supplies the prescribed jute bags to Licensed Buying 
Companies (LBCs), who also supply same to farmers 
through their agents for primary packaging.  After dry -
ing, the beans are bagged by the farmers and sold to 
the LBCs’ agents. The cocoa stays briefly with agents 
before evacuation to a depot. 
STORAGE FACILITY REQUIREMENTS
The agents’ storage facilities which are normally small 
must meet standard requirements in the Cocoa Indus -
LBC SHED
 58
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
therein and also aids in fogging which requires an air -
tight environment to be effective.
Cocoa storage facilities must not have cracks and crev -
ices in the walls or on the floor that will harbour pests.  
Storage facilities should be at least 200metres radius 
away from storage barns, fuel dumps or fire places 
like kitchen or bakery in order to prevent cocoa from 
cross- infestation or absorbing smoke that will culmi -
nate into Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon (PAH) con -
taminations. Such facilities should also not be located 
in water logged areas or low lying areas that are prune 
to water seepage. 
Receipt and evacuation of cocoa into and out of a stor -
age facility must be on first-in-first-out (FIFO) basis. 
It is important to note that facilities for storing cocoa 
cannot be used to store any other products concurrent -
ly. Eating is also not allowed in such facilities.
                 QUALITY CONTROL
The Quality Control Company Limited (COCOBOD), fol -
lowing Federation of Cocoa Commence (FCC), interna -
tional food safety laws and standards, and national 
regulations, carries out quality check on cocoa bean in 
Ghana. Quality Control Company has offices located in 
all the six (6) cocoa regions in Ghana. Ghana’s cocoa 
quality check is in three tiers; (1) first tier at upcountry 
(LBCs’ depot), (2) second tier on arrival at the TOCs and 
(3) third tier at the time of shipment (local evacuation 
or export overseas). 
Stack of Cocoa arranged with alley-ways 
in  a warehouse
Hot fogging Cocoa beans in a warehouse to 
kill flying and crawling insects
Sampling of Cocoa beans in bags 
in a warehouse
Determination of relative humidity (RH) 
using Aquaboy
Bean count to determine average  
bean weight

 59
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Number of beans per 100g Category
Up to 90
91 to 100
101 to 105
106 to 110
111 to 120
121 to 150
151 to 180
Super Main Crop
Main Crop
Super Light Crop
Light Crop
Small Beans
Type 4
Remnant
Main Crop
Light Crop
 
 
BELOW ARE VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF COCOA:
Grade 1 cocoa beans  Grade 2 cocoa beans 
Mouldy beans, maximum 3% by count Mouldy beans, maximum 4% by count 
Slaty beans, maximum 3% by count Slaty beans, maximum 8% by count 
Insect-damaged, germinated or flat beans, total 
maximum 3% by count 
Insect-damaged, germinated or flat beans, total 
maximum 6% by count. 
Any parcel of cocoa with defects beyond that of grade two is marked substandard and not marketable.  
Table
1.   FIRST TIER QUALITY CHECK
For the first tier quality check, the produce is packed/
stacked in lots of 30 bags based on origin (societies) 
after bulking and sieving.  
The moisture content of the beans in each bag in a lot is 
determined by the use of moisture meter as a prelimi -
nary check.  The acceptable moisture content of dry co -
coa bean must be 7.5% or less. Samples are then taken 
from all the bags that passed the preliminary moisture 
check in a lot for further moisture checks.  A confirma -
tory moisture check is then carried out on a subsample 
from a lot after bulking and quartering using a more 
sensitive electrode of the moisture meter. 
When a parcel (a lot) passes the moisture test, it is then 
subjected to bean size categorisation and uniform -
ity index test.  Where the number of beans per 100g 
weight of cocoa (bean count) is determined, the 
unusual beans within are also selected and expressed 
as percentage of the total number of beans.  The ac -
ceptable uniformity index is 10% or less (no category 
of cocoa should have more than 10% of unusual beans 
in the parcel).  Out of the bean count, the average bean 
weight can be determined.
After categorisation, cut test is conducted in order to 
assign a grade to the parcel of cocoa.  For a consign -
ment more than one bag, three hundred beans are 
randomly selected and cut through lengthwise.   Half 
of each bean is arranged in such a way to critically 
examine the cut surfaces for defects. 
The defects so detected are expressed as percentage of 
the number of beans cut. Grades are assigned as below:
Table....
 60
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
ensure that all the bags of cocoa to be evacuated are 
graded and sealed after which the vehicle to transport 
the cocoa will be inspected for its suitability for haul -
age. 
SECOND TIER QUALITY CHECK
On arrival at a TOC, the second tier inspection ensues 
with QCC officials checking for wetness, dirtiness and 
other contaminations of bags, infestation and sound -
ness of the vehicle that transported the stock. Cocoa 
Marketing Company Limited of COCOBOD (CMC) checks 
the number of bags purported to be on the truck and 
the weight of each bag.  Each bag of cocoa on arrival at 
the TOC should weigh 64kg.
When the QCC and CMC are satisfied with regards to 
the parameters checked, samples of cocoa are taken 
from every bag on the vehicle that transported the co -
coa (a vehicle is considered a lot) for inspection and 
grading. This process is similar to that of the first tier 
grading except that there would be no sealing.  Accept -
ance (OK) is then given by QCC if all the parameters 
checked are within the acceptable limit, otherwise the 
parcel is rejected for reconditioning by the LBC if the 
defect can be reconditioned (internal mouldiness can -
not be reconditioned).  Cocoa Marketing Company then 
after issues Certificate of Take Over (CTO) for the co -
coa to go into stack.  At this point, the produce moves 
from the custody of the LBC to CMC who ensures that 
large stacks are built with enough alleyways to allow 
for ease of movement during the inspection and disin -
festation while care is taken to manage space as well. 
THE THIRD TIER QUALITY CHECK
The third tier inspection is carried out during ship -
ment when the cocoa has been disinfested and found 
to be insect free. The entire process of inspection and 
grading is conducted and purity certificate given if the 
parcel passes. A stack in this case represents a “lot”, 
which is normally about 320 metric tonnes. 
The Research Department of QCC regularly monitors the 
fat content in dry nib, free fatty acid level, pH, ochra -
toxin and pesticide residue levels of every consignment 
of exportable cocoa.  In addition, the effectiveness of 
pest control on exportable cocoa is also assessed be -
fore and after export. 
        TRACEABILITY
The grades determined are embossed on the jute bags 
containing the cocoa. In addition to the grades, a code 
for LBC that purchased cocoa from the farmer and the 
region from where it was purchased are also indicated 
on the bag.  Drop marks (society code) and lot num -
ber are all embossed on the bag.  A seal with a specific 
number and a grader’s number pressed on it is affixed 
to a twine used in sewing the bag.  
All these serve as means of traceability.  Sealing a par -
cel of cocoa implies there is agreement between the 
inspector and the owner of the cocoa concerning the 
grade.   A certificate of inspection of cocoa is then is -
sued to cover the graded stock.  
The graded and sealed stock is re-examined to validate 
the grade by a superior officer. This is done to check if 
the grade found tallies with what is indicated on the 
bags, otherwise, the parcel is de-sealed and recondi -
tioned.
After the LBC had accumulated enough graded and 
sealed cocoa in the depot, an application for evacuation 
is sent to QCC.  The stock is cross- checked by QCC to 
TRACEABLE FEATURES pics
For definations on defects of cocoa beans, refer to 
(Appendix 4) 
 61
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                 TRANSPORTATION OF COCOA BEANS
Only trucks that are sound and fit to travel the distance 
required are allowed to transport cocoa beans. For 
secondary evacuation (from depots to TOCs), a truck -
load is normally about 510 bags.  The vehicle should 
not have previously carted poultry products to prevent 
cross infestation; especially mite infestation. If there is 
any doubt, the vehicle is disinfested before the stock is 
loaded onto it ensuring that the top assumes a dome-
shape for easy dripping of raindrops. It is then covered 
with waterproof tarpaulin.  The truck /vehicle should 
have spare tyres and waterproof tarpaulin.  Cocoa on 
the truck should be covered with tarpaulin throughout 
the journey to prevent contaminations.  A vehicle cart -
ing cocoa is not allowed to carry any other produce/
product.
add pic
         SHIPMENT
Evacuation of cocoa from the TOCs to a buyer either 
locally or overseas is loosely referred to as shipment. 
There are four main types of shipments. These are;
• break bulk shipment 
• bag in container shipment
• bulk in container shipment 
• Mega bulk shipment.
BREAK BULK SHIPMENT  
This type of shipment is also called general cargo; here 
the cocoa in bags is loaded onto the ship as individual 
pieces (bags) not in intermodal containers or in bulk.  
The bags are transported to the dock area where they 
are placed on pallets having lifting slings attached, 
commonly referred to as a sling and/or sling load of 
cocoa beans.  A typical sling of cocoa beans contains 
30-35 bags. 
The slings of cargo are arranged in groups adjacent to 
each other with the number of slings per group pref -
erably equalling the capacity of the on-board crane, 
which the ship employs.  The crane then lifts the cargo 
on to the ship.
Offloading of cocoa into warehouse
Break bulk shipment
CONSIDER PIC
 62
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
BAGS IN CONTAINER SHIPMENT  
In this type of shipment, the floors and side walls of the 
container to be used is covered with corrugated Kraft 
paper, cardboard, or a double layer of single paper after 
the container has been inspected and declared fit for 
use.  Bags of cocoa are then stuffed in and dry bags 
(desiccants) hanged inside the container to absorb 
condensation due to temperature fluctuations.  The dry 
bags are arranged in two rows of eight in a fore and aft 
direction on top of the Kraft paper covering the bags 
and four facing the doorway on the floor.
The containers used may be either ventilated or not.
Bags in container shipment
BULK IN CONTAINER SHIPMENT:  
This is the process where naked cocoa beans are 
poured into a container that has been lined with a lin -
ing prescribed by a buyer.  Bags of cocoa beans are 
usually slit opened and the content poured on convey -
or belt system that conveys the naked beans into the 
prepared container. It can also be done in a process 
where pail loader is used to scoop cocoa beans from 
heaps on to conveyor belt which eventually moves the 
beans into the container.
Container lined with the required material for bulk in 
container shipment
Cut and pour process of bulk shipment
Bulk in container shipment
MEGA BULK SHIPMENT
This process is similar to that of bulk in contain -
er shipment but here large quantities of beans are 
transported via conveyor into either a ship hole or a 
hatch, which had been inspected and certified for use. 
Conveyor system for bulk shipment
REPLACE
 63
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
A wide range of pests infest cocoa in storage. Notably 
among them are insects, fungi, rodents and birds. The 
damage caused by these pests may lead to weight 
loss, loss in market value, loss in nutrients, contami -
nations or loss in goodwill.
Some of the insects that infest cocoa in storage 
include Warehouse moth (Ephestia cautella), Rice 
moth (Corcyra cephalonica),Red flour beetle(Tribolium 
castaneum), Cigarette beetle(Lasioderma serricorne), 
Coffee bean beetle(Araecerus fasciculatus), Corn 
sap beetle(Carpophilus dimidiatus) and Rusty grain 
beetle(Cryptolestes ferrugineus).
Federation of Cocoa Commerce (FCC) regulation stipulates 
that merchantable cocoa should be insect free and 
hence the presence of any insect diminishes the value 
of the cocoa.
The major stored cocoa fungi include; Aspergillius spp, 
Penicillium spp, Rhizorpus spp, Mucor spp . Internal 
mouldiness affect the quality and for that matter the 
grade of cocoa. Fungi (mould) attack on cocoa leads 
to increase in free fatty acid (FFA) level in some 
cases production of mycotoxins especially, ochratoxin 
A (OTA).
Rodents and bird cause damage to cocoa mainly by 
contaminating the beans with droppings, urine, hair 
and feathers.
Infestation of cocoa bean by pests usually results 
STORAGE PESTS AND THEIR CONTROL
Lasioderma serricorne Triboliunm castaneum Ephestia cautalla Cryptolestes 
ferrugineus
indisinfestation at ports of destination when pests 
like insects and mites are detected in a consignment 
of cocoa.  The cost of such disinfestation, which is 
usually huge, is passed on to Ghana.  In other cases, 
the consignment may be out rightly rejected if the 
infestation has led to a situation that cannot be 
remedied, for instance contaminations with rodent 
urine etc.
In order to mitigate the destructive effects of pests, 
disinfestation (pest control) strategies are put in 
place.  Pest control in cocoa storage environment 
is solely carried out by QCC.  At the beginning of 
every cocoa season, all storage facilities are cleaned, 
whitewashed and sprayed with COCOBOD approved 
insecticide (mostly pyrethrins and derivatives) before 
cocoa is allowed into them.  Furthermore, cocoa in 
storage is fogged using COCOBOD approved oil based 
insecticide (pyrethrins and derivatives) to curtail 
insect populations.  To ensure that a parcel of insect-
free cocoa is shipped to a client, fumigation which is 
the use of insecticide in the gaseous form (phosphine 
gas) is embarked on.  This operation eliminates all the 
life forms of insects as well as moulds.
Rodenticides and wire mesh are also used to control 
rodents and birds, respectively in the storage environ -
ment.  It is important to state that all pesticides used 
in the cocoa storage environments are tested and the 
implications of their use critically evaluated by quali -
fied personnel before approval is given.  Thereafter, 
staff of QCC are trained on the proper use of the ap -
proved pesticides.
 64
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig 17.1: Loading of cocoa from warehouse
Fig 17.3: Chemical assessment (fat extraction) Fig 17.4: Entomological assessment of nibs
change pics
Fig 17.2: Physical assessment of cocoa beans
x
SOME WORK HERE HAVE 
BEEN SENT TO EMERG -
ING ISSUES
 65
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Physical assessment
Chemical assessment
Moisture content
pH  of cocoa beans
Fat content
Entomological assessment
Free fatty acids (FFA)
Aflatoxin testing
Microbiological analysis
Pesticide residue testing
COCOA LABORATORY ANALYSIS INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING:
PHYSICAL ASSESSMENT OF COCOA AT FARM LEVEL INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING:
Cocoa quality can also be ensured by the farmer at the farm level through good post harvest practices. The 
farmer can assess the different types of defects in cocoa using the physical means.
            MOULDY/MILDEWED  BEANS – BADLY DRIED BEANS
                These are the worst defect of cocoa, which leads to the reduction in the value of cocoa. 
                However, it is easily avoidable.
Description -The bean is mouldy on the inside and when cut or broken, a blanket of mould of 
variable colour (from black to white through brown and yellow) will be seen.
-The bean is affected by moulds after the fermentation process.
-The bean will still be considered mouldy even if a small part of it is affected.
-This defect cannot be repaired
Causes -Inadequate drying of cocoa beans
-Storage of inadequately dried beans in a sack
-Storage of dry cocoa beans in a poorly ventilated room results in the uptake of 
moisture by the beans.
Consequences  -If the beans are poorly dried or stored in a poorly ventilated room, the mould can 
spread quickly to infect the entire pile of cocoa beans.
-One bag of mouldy cocoa beans can reduce the value of a whole truck load.
-The presence of mouldy beans in chocolate production will result in a chocolate 
with a bad flavour.
How to avoid it and 
test it 
-Infection by mould can be prevented during drying of the beans.
-The beans must always be thoroughly dry before bagging.
-To test for mouldy beans, the beans must be crushed in the hands and if the shells 
do not crack then they are not dried enough.
                INSECT DAMAGED/MOTH-EATEN BEANS
Description -The beans are damaged by insects (moths/mites) and their larvae that feed on them.
-The moth can still be in the bean or left the bean after feeding, it is still considered as 
insect damaged.
Causes -Long storage periods of cocoa
-Poorly dried cocoa beans.
Consequences -When the cocoa stored for long periods, the insect multiply and spread quickly in 
the store room. 
-Untreated insect infested cocoa beans will also affect cocoa in other countries 
when exported
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Ensure that storage rooms are free of insects (moths/mites).
-Fumigation of store rooms with recommended fumigants.
 66
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Harvest pods regularly
-remove diseased pods from healthy ones
-Avoid long storage of cocoa
             GERMINATED BEANS
Description -Germinated /sprouted beans have a small point at one end of the bean
Causes -Over ripening or leaving pods on tree for a long time before harvesting
-leaving an opened pod for a day or two can also cause germination of beans
Consequences -Facilitates the entry of moulds through the ripped hull of the bean.
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Harvest regularly
-Ferment beans immediately after pod breaking.
-Do not mix sprouted beans other beans to prevent the spread of moulds
             CHIPPED BEANS
Description -Beans with injury
Causes -Breaking of pods with cutlass or sharp object
Consequences -Facilitates the entry of moulds through the wounded area
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Breaking of pods with wooden clubs
-Do not mix injured beans other beans to prevent the spread of moulds
              PURPLE BEANS
Causes -Harvesting of unripe or green pods
-Under fermentation
Consequences -Bitter chocolate
-Reduction in market value
             SLATE BEANS
Description -The bean shows a slate colour (dark gray) on the inside when cut.
Causes -under fermentation or no fermentation at all.
-Insufficient fermentation heap size.
-Outside temperature too low (harmattan)
Consequences -Slate beans gives chocolate a bad taste (bitter or musty).
-They also reduce the market value of cocoa.
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Good fermentation practices
• Ferment under shade
• Heap size of at least 300 kg
• Ferment on banana leaves and cover with banana leaves
• Ferment for 6 day
             BLACK BEANS AND BEANS WITH HIGH FREE FATTY ACID (FFA) CONTENT
Description -Black beans have low bean weight and high FFA content.
-FFA cannot be seen with the naked eye but can be determined by chemical tests.
Causes -Diseases such as black pod and brown rot (pourriture brune).
-pods that have been left on trees for a long time before harvesting. 
-Improper storage or long storage of cocoa beans can also cause an increase in FFA.
Consequences -Reduction in the market value of cocoa.
 67
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
              BEAN DEBRIS AND FOREIGN MATTER
Description -Small pieces of broken beans mixed with good beans
-Foreign matter include
- Small stones
- Pieces of pod husk
- Pieces of placenta
- Pieces of metal
Causes -unsorted cocoa or sorting not well done
-place of drying not clean
-farmer cheating the buyer by adding pieces of stones and metals the bag of cocoa to 
increase the weight
Consequences - Reduction in the market value of cocoa.
-Gives extra work to the exporter by sorting before marketing.
How to avoid it 
and test it
-Ensuring proper bean sorting
-Keep areas of drying clean, use raised mats.
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Harvesting of mature or ripe pods
-Fermentation for 6 days
              BROWN BEANS, BLACK SPOTS
Causes -Over fermentation
Consequences -Taste of rot
- Reduction in market value
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Fermentation for 6 days
              SMOKY BEANS
Causes -Drying or storage of beans in contact with smoke
Consequences -Taste of smoke
How to avoid it and 
test it
-Avoid bean contact with smoke from fire.
Causes -unsorted cocoa or sorting not well done
-place of drying not clean
-farmer cheating the buyer by adding pieces of stones and metals the bag of cocoa to 
increase the weight
Consequences - Reduction in the market value of cocoa.
-Gives extra work to the exporter by sorting before marketing
             LOW GRAINING AND FLAT BEANS
Description -Low graining is due to small bean size
-Flat beans have cotyledons which are completely atrophied due to malnourishment 
from the tree.
Causes -The size of the tree is related to the development of pods on the tree.
-Lack of water and nutrients or disease infection affect the size of beans and number of 
pods on a tree.
Consequences -Large beans have more cocoa butter and that manufacturers prefer them to small 
beans.
- Reduction in the market value of cocoa.
 68
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
How to avoid it 
and test it
-             Good agronomic practices
- Mulching
- Correct spacing
- Spraying against diseases.
      3.14   COST AND BENEFITS OF COCOA PRODUCTION
The following factors of production have to be considered 
before venturing into cocoa farming: Land, labour, capital 
and entrepreneurship. Details are presented in the table 
below:
These usually include the following:
1) Land which is usually estimated as rent per annum. 
2) Land preparation which involves clearing, stumping, 
ploughing etc.
3) Planting which may include planting materials, nursery 
development, cost of planting itself and transportation.
4) Weeding which is either manual or chemical.
5) Fertilizer application which also includes cost, transport 
and application cost.
6) Application of insecticides/fungicides which may in -
clude cost of chemical, cost of spraying (may include hiring 
of sprayer).
7) Harvesting which involves plucking, gathering of pods, 
breaking of pods, fermentation etc.
8) Transportation of produce to the point of sale.
N: B. Most labour operations may be in the form of contract 
or by-day charges and it may be necessary to estimate op-
portunity cost of family labour or any other inputs at the 
prevailing market rate in the area. 
COMPONENTS OF COST
Some farm machinery and equipment are not consumed 
within a single production cycle. In other words only a frac-
tion of the value is used in one cycle usually in a year. The 
value used must be estimated and added to the cost to 
obtain the total cost of production. This is normally done 
either using the depreciated value of the equipment used 
in the cycle or using the opportunity cost. 
      COST OF COCOA PRODUCTION
TABLE:XXX  (A) COST OF INPUTS FOR ESTABLISHING ONE HECTARE OF COCOA FARM - 1ST YEAR
COST OF PRODUCING ONE HECTARE OF COCOA OVER A THREE (3) YEAR PERIOD
COST OF INPUTS UNIT PRICE  (GH¢)           QUANTITY COST PER HECTARE (GH¢)
Pegs 0.50 1,100 550.00
Plantain Suckers 1.00 1,200 1200.00
Economic Shade Trees 1.00 18 18.00
Cocoa Seedlings 0.2 1,200 240.00
Sulphate of Ammonia (bags) 100.00 2.00 200.00
Insecticide (Litres) 40.00 2 80.00
Subtotal (A)   2,288.00
 69
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
TABLE:XXX (B) COST OF ACTIVITIES FOR ESTABLISHING ONE HECTARE OF COCOA- 1ST YEAR
TABLE:XXX (C) COST OF ESTABLISHING ONE HECTARE OF COCOA FARM 2ND AND 3RD YEAR
COSTS OF ESTABLISH -
MENT
UNITS PER HECTARE 
(eg. no. of man- days, 
no. of bags, trans -
porting distance)
UNIT VALUE  (local 
currency) GH¢
COST PER HECTARE 
(local currency) 
GH¢
REMARKS
Land Preparation:     
Land Clearing 15 20.00 300.00  
Felling &  Chopping big 
trees
1 600.00 600.00 Using chain saw 
machine
Clearing stumps 20 20.00 400.00 Man days 
Lining and Pegging 8 20.00  160.00                  Man 
days
Labour Cost:   
Cost of Transportation of 
plantain suckers (aver -
age distance of 3km)
3 100.00 300.00  
Carting of cocoa seed -
lings (Average distance 
of 3 km)
3 100.00 300.00 100 cedis per 
kilometer
Holing and Transplanting 
seedlings
10 20.00 200.00  
Fertilizer application 5 20.00 100.00  
Weeding ( 4 x per annum) 48 20.00 960.00 12 man days per 
weeding
Insecticide application 2 20.00 40.00  
 SubTotal (B)   3,360.00  
TOTAL (A+B)  
(COST OF INPUTS & 
ACTIVITIES - 1ST YEAR)
 
 6,240.00
COST OF ESTABLISHMENT UNITS PER HECTARE (Eg. No. of 
Man- Days, No. of bags, litres)
UNIT VALUE        
(Local Currency)   
GH¢
COST PER 
HECTARE  
(Local Cur -
rency) GH¢
REMARKS
Purchase and transporta -
tion of cocoa seedlings
500 0.40 200.00  
Filling of vacancy (20% 
seedlings required / Ha)
2 25.00 50.00 Man days
Weeding (4 x per annum) 96 25.00 2400.00 12 man days 
per weeding
Cost of Insecticide (litres) 4 45.00 180.00  
Insecticide application 4 40.00 160.00  
Cost of Fertilizer (Ammo -
nia Sulphate)
5 100.00 500.00  
Fertilizer application 10 25.00 250.00  
Total cost per hectare (C  )   3,740.00  
*Grand total cost of establishiing 1 hectare cocoa farm for first three years (A+B+C) GH¢ 9,980.00
 70
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Assumptions:
1. Prices given are purely for illustrative purposes
2. Farmer has access to land
3. Farmer will utilize paid labour for all activities
4. Figures of benefits of cocoa cultivation were taken from 
the FBS training manual by GIZ
            3.15   USES OF COCOA AND ITS BY-PRODUCTS
• Chocolate
• Cocoa butter
• Cocoa powder
There are also many by products that can be derived from 
cocoa waste. Some of them are as follows:
• Animal feed production from cocoa pod husk
• Potash production for soap from cocoa pod husk
• Wine,  alcoholic beverages such as the local gin  
 (akpeteshie), gin and brandy from cocoa sweatings
• Jams and marmalades  from cocoa sweatings
• Pectin for pharmaceuticals, cosmetic and food  
 industries.
              COCOA CONSUMPTION
Despite being the world’s second largest producer of 
cocoa, the average Ghanaian consumes about 0.5 kilo -
grams of cocoa products produced per year. There is 
therefore a profound dichotomy between the quantity 
of raw cocoa produced in Ghana and the quantity of 
cocoa products consumed in the country. To curb this 
menace and cultivate the habit of cocoa consumption 
among Ghanaians, COCOBOD has put the following 
measures in place:
• Giving of special concession to companies 
interested in local processing of cocoa
• Constitution of a National Committee for the 
Promotion of Cocoa Consumption 
• Introduction of an annual Cocoa Festival to 
create awareness of the various cocoa products avail -
able and promote its utilization among Ghanaians. The 
festival is also aimed at providing a platform to sensi -
tize Ghanaians on the health and nutritional benefits 
of cocoa and imbibe its consumption in them.
• Introduction of an award scheme for scientists 
who conduct research on the health benefits of cocoa 
as well as an award for journalists who write on cocoa 
consumption.
• Development of promotional brochures, post -
ers and flyers on the health and nutritional benefits of 
cocoa
• Using other integrated marketing communica -
tion tools to promote cocoa consumption.
 71
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
4.0GOOD ENVIRONMENTAL PRACTICES (GEPs)
          4.1 CLIMATE CHANGE, COCOA CULTIVATION AND 
          CARBON TRADING
Climate change and climate variability pose a signifi -
cant challenge on smallholder cocoa farming in Ghana. 
To address this issue require a new approach, called 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA), for re-orientating ag -
ricultural production to the realities of climate change. 
CSA combines different methods under a climate um -
brella and assesses the risks and needs of a specific 
farm or farming community by addressing them to en -
sure resiliency and adaptation in the face of climate 
change.
“Climate change” is a change of climate which is attrib -
uted directly or indirectly to human activity that alters 
the composition of the global atmosphere and which is 
in addition to natural climate variability observed over 
comparable time periods. 
It is becoming increasingly evident that the amount 
and distribution of rainfall in support of optimum plant 
growth and profitable crop production has been declin -
ing over the years. Also the intensity of sunshine and 
other climatic conditions have changed considerably. 
This is attributed to what is now referred to as Global 
warming or Climate Change. The scientific community 
has agreed that Climate Change is happening as a re -
sult of human activities.
                   CLIMATE CHANGE MECHANISM
Slashing and burning of vegetation for agricultural pur -
poses, industries and vehicles, emit a lot of gases called 
greenhouse gases. Greenhouse gases, once emitted, go 
up in the air and cover earth like a blanket. When there 
are a lot of greenhouse gases in the air, the heat from 
the sun is contained under the blanket of gases.  As the 
earth gets more heated, the rainfall pattern changes, 
and we start to experience unusual weather conditions 
all around the world resulting in the phenomenon often 
referred to as Global Warming or Climate Change.
                             CLIMATE HAZARDS
The main climate hazards that have been identified for 
the cocoa sector in Ghana include higher ambient tem -
peratures, drought conditions, high or extreme rainfall 
events and flooding. Some major areas and sectors 
that are particularly important, and which could also 
be adversely affected by climate change are: water re -
sources, agriculture and hence food insecurity, natural 
resource productivity and biodiversity, human health 
as a result of increased incidence of vectors, coastal 
zone vulnerability to sea-level rise   with flooding, land 
management as a result of intensification   of deser -
tification, decline in national revenue particularly that   
from cocoa, decrease in energy (hydropower) produc -
tion, reduction of tourist facilities particularly coastal 
infrastructure and national parks. The harsh effects of 
climate change is likely to impact more on vulnerable 
groups like women and the poor.  
                   IMPLICATIONS ON COCOA OUTPUTS
Most cocoa farmers are already aware of these chang -
es in their area and perceive climate change in terms of 
changes in rainfall pattern and temperature. Projected 
rainfall for 2020, 2050, and 2080 for the semi decidu -
ous (SDFZ) and high rainforest zones (HRFZ) of Ghana, 
where most of the nation’s cocoa is grown, indicates a 
decline in rainfall by 2%, 11%, 19% and 3%, 12% 20% re -
spectively. The predicted drop in cocoa yield will be 14% 
and 28% for 2020 and 2050 respectively. By 2080, mois -
ture is predicted to be inadequate for profitable cocoa 
production in Ghana if the current trend is maintained.
 
                                      VEGETATION
There is evidence that the forest savanna interface is 
moving southwards and so with cocoa production. Ini -
tial results of the Consultative Group for International 
Agricultural Research (CGIAR’s) global ‘Çlimate Change, 
Agriculture and Food Security’(CCAFS) research project 
notes that by 2030 climate change will reduce the area 
available for cocoa production towards the northern 
transition to the Savanna zone. The current area for 
cocoa in Ashanti will remain suitable but will face un -
certain climatic condition. Areas in the Western, Cen -
tral and Eastern regions will likely become hotter and 
wetter, yet remain suitable for growing cocoa. 
 72
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
The impact of climate change for each region will re -
quire site-specific adaptation strategies to the degree 
of impacts. The northern cocoa belt regions will have 
to diversify into alternative cropping systems to adjust 
to either a changed climate or uncertain future. The 
southern part characteristics of the climate will remain 
the same but have to cope with higher temperatures. 
Southern Brong Ahafo, northern Ashanti and the north 
and south of Volta will become ‘transformation zones 
that are expected to have to transition or transform 
into alternative agricultural systems. These areas were 
classified as no longer suitable for cocoa production by 
2030.
                           STRATEGIC MEASURES
CSA strategies include many tried and tested measures 
for  sustainable agriculture- building soil fertility, pro -
tecting watersheds, increasing access to knowledge, 
inputs and markets for more profitable and food secure 
farming livelihoods. For instance, CSA strategies that 
address drought conditions in a cocoa farming sys -
tem will include suitable cover crops to enhance soil 
moisture retention and soil structure that aids water 
absorption, shade trees species that creates a micro -
climate that is supportive of life changes of cocoa and 
reduces competition for nutrients and water, or tradi -
tional drip irrigation systems that can aid the survival 
and growth in the establishment phase.
                                 CARBON TRADING
Is a term that has emerged from climate negotiations, 
and is a market based mechanism for helping mitigate 
the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Car -
bon trading markets are platforms that bring buyers 
and sellers of carbon credits together with standard -
ized rules of trade.
Potential buyer of carbon credit is any entity, typically a 
business that emits carbon dioxide to the atmosphere 
and may have interest or may be required by law to 
balance its emissions through mechanisms of carbon 
sequestration. These businesses may include power 
generating facilities or many kinds of manufacturers.
This emerging phenomenon could potentially lead to 
international carbon trade.
Fig. 1 Quality of change of agro-ecological zones (AEZ) for cocoa in Ghana 2050s; Locations in light green will not 
change the AEZ, yellowlocations will have to adjust to a different AEZ, orange high uncertainty, and red indicates 
transformation sites and dark green opportunity sites; shading indicates protected areas.

 73
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                      COCOA AND CARBON TRADING
Cocoa production in Ghana is said to follow a distinct 
cycle. The main characteristics of this cycle are:
i)   Forest rent is the perfect growing environment rep -
resented by the forest ecosystem. The benefits include: 
soil fertility, protection from erosion, moisture or high 
humidity, protection from drying winds, stabilizing ef -
fect of precipitation within rainforest zone, protection 
from diseases and pests 
ii)   Migration; a process by which cocoa farmers ha -
bitually migrate in search of new ‘forest rent’.
Clearing or thinning forests to plant cocoa will have a 
negative climatic effect. However, lands that are al -
ready degraded, planted in annual crop cycles, or are 
classified as savannah lands and are converted to co -
coa cultivation will show a net gain in carbon and con -
tribute to climate mitigation. 
The greatest climatic effect of shaded cocoa systems is 
the effect of buffer zones in providing farmers a prof -
itable cash crop option that maintains shade around 
protected forests. Thus:
a)  farmers in the cocoa industry could through good 
agricultural practices reduce climate change and po -
tentially trade in carbon.
b)  practices that lead to deforestation and accelerate 
desertification should be discouraged whilst encourag -
ing the planting of trees or afforestation.
From the above, it can be seen that farmers in the co -
coa industry could through good agricultural practices 
reduce climate change and potentially trade in carbon. 
Practices that lead to deforestation and accelerate de -
sertification should be discouraged whilst encouraging 
the planting of trees or afforestation.
         4.2   WATER MANAGEMENT 
•Water is a vital natural resource for the survival of 
men, animals and plants. 
•With two thirds of the earth’s surface covered by wa -
ter and given the fact that 75% of our own body consists 
of water, it is clear that water is one of the prime ele -
ments responsible for life on earth. 
•Water circulates through the land.
•All kinds of contamination of surface and underground 
water have to be avoided by adequate measures such as: 
a)   Keeping a certain distance between the fields/plan -
tations and rivers, streams, lakes, etc., 
b)  Preventing water contamination caused by the run-
off of chemicals or sediments and
c)   By avoiding any dumping of wastes (crop residues, 
empty containers, plastic bags, etc.) into the waters. 
d)  Manure, fertilisers and agrochemicals must be han -
dled and stored in a way that prevents contamination 
because they pose a threat to human health 
and to biodiversity.
         4.3   ECOSYSTEM PROTECTION
Cocoa production has contributed to deforestation 
and biodiversity loss in West Africa and other tropical 
countries. However, cocoa can also play a positive role 
for the environment and biodiversity conservation, if it 
is grown in a way that is similar to the cocoa’s natural 
habitat, the rain forest. Shade-grown cocoa agrofor -
estry systems are much more beneficial for the protec -
tion of biodiversity than full-sun plantation systems. 
(Agroforestry systems involve growing tree species in 
association with food crops and livestock on the same 
piece of land). Cocoa agroforests play an important role 
for the environment, like maintaining soil moisture, 
protecting soils from erosion, providing habitat for pol -
linators and other beneficial insects.
•The habitats of plants and animals need to be pre -
served because all living species have a role to play in 
our environment. 
•Forests, for instance, provide habitats for many 
plants and animals that find shelter and food. 
•Farming, cutting trees, development of roads and 
new settlements destroy habitats. In this way, plants 
and animals which previously used such places are dis -
placed or destroyed, leading to loss of biodiversity.
•The importance of forests includes the following 
facts:
i) Forests enhance rainfall. This happens when trees 
capture water from the ground and release it into the 
atmosphere. This water comes back as rain water. 
ii) Forests act like a sponge to retain large quantities of 
water. They gradually release the water so that it does 
not run off to cause floods and erosion. Most rivers 
have their source in forests. Often, the only streams 
that flow in the dry season are found in forests.
iii)  Trees help to reduce erosion along streams and thus 
protect soil and maintain clean water. During unusual 
climate changes such as long dry periods and extreme 
rainfall, forests provide habitats for wildlife.
 74
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
•Take measures to protect the ecosystem as follows:
i) Establish farms away from national parks, wildlife 
refuges, forestry reserves, buffer zones and other pub -
lic or private conservation areas.  
ii) Do not cut forest trees to establish new farms.
iii)  Establish protected zones by growing trees and 
other vegetation on the banks of water bodies and be -
tween farms and protected areas. 
iv) Keep a vegetation cover wherever possible to avoid 
bare soils and plant or promote natural growth of di -
verse trees on land not suitable for agriculture.
v) Use diverse and native tree species that will lead to 
multiple canopy levels. 
vi) Do not collect threatened or endangered plant spe -
cies. 
vii)  Do not burn to prepare new land for farming. 
           4.4   WILDLIFE PROTECTION
•In Ghana, the annual ban on hunting and collection 
of wild animals, otherwise known as “Close Season” 
begins on 1st August and lasts till 1st December. This 
is the breeding season of most of the animals. 
•During this period it is illegal for anybody to hunt, 
capture, or destroy any wild animal except the grass-
cutter which can be done only under license issued by 
the Wildlife Division of the Forestry Commission.
•There are increased concerns about the effects that 
farming activities over the years have had on wildlife, 
with reports of declining numbers of farmland birds, 
insects, small mammals and rare plant species. 
•The natural homes of plants and animals have been 
altered or destroyed due to farming activities such as 
land clearing, bush burning, application of agrochemi -
cals, ploughing and harrowing as well as logging. 
•Wildlife exists in a variety of habitats and some spe -
cies, such as grass-cutters, can thrive in cultivated ar -
eas. 
•Wild animals are our natural resources and require 
our collective efforts to conserve them. For most farm -
ers wildlife is considered a pest that is directly compet -
ing with agricultural activities.
• However, wildlife does not have to compete with ag -
riculture; on the contrary, it can benefit the farmers by 
maintaining a healthy balance in the ecosystem.
•It is important for cocoa farmers to produce high 
yielding quality cocoa. 
•However, their production objectives should not en -
danger the survival of wildlife.
•Conserve wildlife through sustainable farming with 
the following activities:
i) Do not resort to bad practices such as bush burning, 
draining of ponds, or illegal hunting of wildlife animals
ii) Maintain a varied ecosystem as much as possible by 
retaining semi-natural habitats such as wetlands, for -
est trees and having a wide mix of crops within the co -
coa plantation. This will maximise the insect and seed 
food sources for wildlife and increase the number of 
breeding sites.
iii)  Keep fertilisers and pesticides away from natural 
vegetation and water. Pesticides are hazardous pol -
lutants that affect wildlife at many levels. Many pes -
ticides take a long time to degrade and build up in the 
soils or throughout the food chain. 
iv) Predators such as hawks and owls can be harmed 
if they eat poisoned animals. Some groups of animals 
which live in water bodies are particularly vulnerable to 
these chemical pollutants and suffer greatly as a re -
sult of the high levels of pesticides in their habitat.
v) Harvesting should respect legislation (i.e. closed 
season and open season) 
vi) Endangered species should not be hunted on any 
occasion
     4.5   FARM WASTE MANAGEMENT 
•Good waste management on farms is essential to en -
sure a healthy, safe and productive farming enterprise. 
•Farmers are obliged to ensure that their waste do 
not impact negatively on the environment. ‘Clean and 
green’ agriculture is of increasing importance to cocoa 
farmers. 
•Appropriate management of farm waste can benefit 
farms by preventing:
i)   Contamination of the land and water on farms. 
 75
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
ii)  Breeding sites for disease spreading organisms. 
iii)    Pests and predators. 
•Avoid or reduce the production of waste by:
i) purchasing only what you need. When purchasing 
materials, such as agro-inputs, consider the costs of 
disposal. Where appropriate, buy materials in bulk so 
that you save on packaging material.
ii) Emptying chemical drums and using containers: 
all empty chemical containers should be rinsed three 
times immediately after use to prevent the chemical 
residue from solidifying in the containers. Then punc -
ture the containers in the base to make them unusable 
and store them in a secure compound until their dis -
posal is arranged. 
iii)  The leftover and rinsing liquid can be used to form 
a part of the spray mixture for the next application or 
sprayed on cocoa trees. 
iv) Care should be taken to ensure that the water used 
for rinsing does not contaminate the environment - 
particularly the drinking water. 
v) Never burn the containers, because the fumes are 
toxic. 
vi) Also burying of containers is not allowed.
• Treat wastes where appropriate
Green wastes can be composted and reused as a fer -
tiliser and soil conditioner. Composting green wastes 
will assist in destroying weed seeds.
    4.6    PESTICIDES
Pesticides refer to any chemical used to kill, repel or 
control insects, weeds, rodents and other pests. Pesti -
cides are usually classified on the basis of their target 
species, toxicity, hazard, chemical class or by use. For 
instance, insecticides, larvicides and fungicides kill in -
sects, insect larvae and fungi and moulds respectively. 
Rodenticides kill rats, mice and other rodents. Miti -
cides, molluscicides, avicides and nematicides also kill 
mites, snails, birds and nematodes respectively. Her -
bicides or weedicides kill weeds. The technical product 
of these pesticides is the chemical known as the ac -
tive ingredient combined withother substances which 
are associated with it during their manufacturing pro -
cesses. The active ingredient is usually mixed with ther 
other substances to facilitate its use. It is then known 
as a formulation. The other substances or ingredients 
mixed with the chemical in the formulation are the ve -
hicle in the pesticide product. They may be solvents, 
stabilizers, preservatives and surfactants .
      
                                         TOXICITY
The toxicity of a chemical is its ability to cause harmful 
effect in a living organism. The toxicity of a formulation 
usually varies with the concentration of the active in -
gredient in the formulation but it can also vary with the 
non-pesticidal constituents of a formulation or if the 
other substances associated with the active ingredient 
exceed their average levels. This normally occurs after 
long storage. The active ingredients (technical grade) 
of pesticides are classified (WHO rankings) as follows:
1. Extremely hazardous   (class Ia)
2.  Highly hazardous        (class Ib)
3. Moderately hazardous (class II)
4. Slightly hazardous        (class III)
5. Active ingredients unlikely to present acute  
 hazard in normal use
                                         HAZARD
Hazard is the inherent property to cause a potential -
harmful effect. Risk is the likelihood that a harmful ef -
fect might result from exposure to a particular hazard. 
For toxicity to occur there must be exposure to a haz -
ardous chemical. Pesticides selected for use on cocoa 
are expected to meet several safety, hazard and tox -
icity and residue criteria. Generally, pesticides on the 
classes Ia and Ib of the WHO classification are too haz -
ardous for use on cocoa
MODES OF ABSORPTIONS OF AGROCHEMICALS 
ESPECIALLY PESTICIDES:
Absorption through the skin
Many pesticides form can be absorbed even through 
the intact skin without showing any marks.
How are they absorbed?
• When dust clings to the skin
• When liquid splashes on the skin
• When skin is immersed in liquid
• When spray mist/rebound spray lands on the  
 skin and dries out.
Factors which will increase the absorption of pesti -
cides through skin exposure:
• Formulation is concentrated
• The skin is warm or sweaty
 76
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
The absorption of pesticides through wounds, cracked 
skin and rashes on exposed skin is greater than that 
through the same area of intact skin.
Absorption through the lungs
Pesticides get into the lungs if gas or vapour is inhaled. 
Once taken into the lungs, it may be rapidly absorbed.
In what form can pesticides enter the lung?
• Very light dust
• Vapour
• Aerosol
• Fog
• Gases
Pesticides taken through the mouth are absorbed in 
the gut
This may happen if you eat, drink or smoke at work 
(during mixing of pesticides and spraying) or without 
first washing hands after spraying.
                     4.7   USE OF AGROCHEMICALS
Farmers often apply agrochemicals without under -
standing the causes of the problems and without 
knowing how to prevent them in the first place.
•Agrochemicals are often used without selecting the 
most appropriate and safest product that is registered 
with the authorities. 
•Spraying machines often do not have the recom -
mended nozzle size or are not properly maintained, 
causing risks of poisoning for the farmer and the en -
vironment.
•Farmers must understand that application of agro -
chemicals must be based on rational use and that they 
are the last resort in a combination of various tech -
niques to reduce the likeliness that pests and diseases 
grow out of control.
HOW TO ENSURE SAFE USE OF PESTICIDES
• Take adequate measures such as:
i) Keeping agrochemicals out of reach of children. Only 
use or store agrochemicals which are permitted by the 
EPA and COCOBOD/CRIG.
ii) Protecting yourself by wearing protective clothing 
when applying agrochemicals.
iii)  Avoid using chemicals that are banned or not ap -
proved in the country for cocoa. 
iv) Applying agrochemicals that are suitable for the 
pest, disease or weed, according to label recommenda -
tions. 
v) Using the prescribed dosage, timing and intervals of 
application of agrochemicals as indicated on their la -
bels and train workers accordingly.
Vi) Read label instructions carefully.
vii)  Do not buy damaged pesticides.
viii)  Do not store pesticides in the bedroom or near food 
items or farm produce.
 ix) Storing agrochemicals in places which are well ven -
tilated and light enough to ensure that product labels 
can be easily read. When transporting agrochemicals, 
they must be properly sealed to prevent spillage.
x) Areas for preparing agrochemicals must be equipped 
for spills.
xi) Plan spraying in such a way as to have no or very 
little spray solution left.
xii)  After applying agrochemicals, place warning signs 
at the farm to indicate time of application and recom -
mended days until harvest and train workers accord -
ingly.
xiii)  Keeping invoices or any other documentary evi -
dence of all agrochemicals used in a safe place and 
make them available at the time of inspection.
xiv)  Calibrate at least once a year and maintain applica -
tion equipment in order to minimise waste and exces -
sive applications of chemicals.
xv) Empty containers must be triple rinsed, punctured 
and safely stored. All equipment that has been in con -
tact with hazardous materials must be cleaned and 
stored.
xvi)  Keep records to prove that reliance on chemicals is 
being reduced gradually.
•Do not use expired insecticides.
•Never stir insecticides mixture with your hands.
•Never suck up liquid insecticides with a tube.
 77
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
•Do not blow out clogged spraying machine nozzles 
or sieve with the mouth but clean them with soap and 
clear water, using a sponge or brush.
•Never eat, drink or smoke when spraying.
•Do not use recommended cocoa insecticides on other 
crops.
•Do not work in strong wind or spray against the wind 
direction. This means that before starting to spray, you 
must find the wind direction and spray along it.
•Do not spray agrochemicals when childred are around. 
Children should leave the form before spraying.
The first step therefore, in the safe use of pesticides 
is the reading of the label. The label which should be 
in English or local language should have the following 
essential parts:
•The trade name and the approved name of the pes -
ticide.
•The active ingredients and the hazards it presents 
(the classification of the formulation
Keep unused pesticides in a locked cupboard but not  in 
the same cupboard as drugs or medicine.
The adverse effects of pesticide use
In the environment pesticides can contaminate soil and 
animal food on the ground, water and air. This can re -
sult in the loss of domestic animals and birds, fish and 
beneficial insect. Every effort must be made to apply 
pesticides so that the environment is not harmed.
 78
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
5.0 GOOD SOCIAL PRACTICES (GSPs)
     5.1   FARMER ORGANIZATIONS
There are success stories of farmer associations that 
have improved the lot of their members.  For instance 
the Kuapa Kokoo Farmers Union in Ghana has built the 
reputation of furthering the interests of her members 
by providing credit and extension support. Besides 
Kuapa Kokoo there are other farmer associations in the 
cocoa sector.  
TYPES OF FARMERS ASSOCIATIONS IN THE GHANA 
COCOA INDUSTRY
Over the years, five types of farmers’ associations have 
evolved in the Ghana cocoa industry.These include 
farmers’ co-operative marketing organizations, cocoa 
farmer marketing societies, farmers marketing compa -
nies, farmers’ production associations and farmers’ as -
sistance societies. The objectives of these associations 
are not much different from each other. In general 
these associations are interested in the production and 
marketing of their produce and the acquisition of farm 
inputs to improve cocoa output and hence to increase 
their incomes.  They mainly target farm inputs includ -
ing chemicals and equipment for pests and diseases 
control, and other yield increasing input technologies 
such as fertilizers at low cost.  Other objectives include 
enhanced ability to mobilize savings and attract capital 
for farm investments, access to labour at low prices for 
farm maintenance, improved inputs delivery system, 
and to serve as a forum for the dissemination of cocoa 
production technologies.
1. Farmers’ co-operative marketing organization s
These are registered co-operative societies that op -
erate according to co-operative principles. In Ghana 
these organizations consist of primary co-operatives 
societies at the village or cocoa buying centre levels 
comprising mainly of cocoa farmers whose main objec -
tive is to produce and market their cocoa.  The umbrella 
organization under which the primary co-operatives 
operate is the Ghana Co-operative Marketing Associa -
tion Limited which is registered by the Department of 
Co-operatives . 
2. Cocoa farmer marketing societies
These consist of non-registered semi-cooperative pri -
mary societies which evolved around the cocoa buying 
centres in the wake of the dissolution of the United 
Gold Coast Farmers Convention (UGFCC).  The structure 
is based on formal co-operatives.  They are managed 
by seven-member executive committees consisting of 
a Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer, and 4 other mem -
bers.  The executive members are elected by voting and 
are removed or replaced if society members are not 
satisfied with their performance.Members contribute 
one kilogramme of cocoa beans on each bag of cocoa 
brought to the society buying centre as a means of 
building up capital for the purchase of inputs in bulk 
for their use on credit basis.  This is referred to as the 
‘kilo kilo’ deductions by the farmers.  Funds not used 
for input purchases are used to grant credit to the 
farmers for other welfare purposes, such as payment 
of wards’ school fees.  The ‘kilo kilo’ deduction funds 
are also meant to be used as collateral for input credit 
from other sources. Some of these associations have 
been successfully used as channels of input credit to 
cocoa farmers.  However, much needs to be done to im -
prove on their performance.  Among some of the prob -
lems associated with these associations is the lack of 
accountability on the part of the executive committee 
of some of the societies.   This has led to mistrust and 
some farmers have stopped contributing to the ‘kilo 
kilo’ fund.  There are also complaints that the few liter -
ates in the societies take advantage of their illiterate 
counterparts through autocratic control thereby under -
mining the original objective of democratic control.
3. Farmers marketing input companies
There is currently only one such company in the in -
dustry, as a subsidiary of the Ghana Cocoa, Coffee, and 
Shea nut Farmers Association.  The main objective is to 
improve inputs distribution to cocoa, coffee, and shea 
nut farmers.  The company has set up a number of de -
pots in the cocoa growing areas from where farmers 
buy their input needs.  The initial problems being en -
countered are in the form of low capital endowments, 
low managerial skills, lack of sufficient infrastructure 
in the form of warehouses and haulage trucks.
4. Cocoa farmers’ production association
These are relatively new associations which are emerg -
ing in the cocoa growing areas.  They consist of informal 
self-help farmer groupings with memberships of up to 
300 farmers in some areas and concentrated around 
 79
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
cocoa farming villages and small townships.  The main 
objective of these farmer associations is to assist one 
another to obtain and apply the latest technological in -
puts to boost their cocoa production for bulk purchas -
ing and distribution of farm inputs.
5. Farmers’ assistance societies
These are also recent forms of farmer associations that 
are springing up around the cocoa buying centres.  The 
modus operandi of these societies include the mobili -
zation of funds and labour in the cocoa farming com -
munities for carrying out farm maintenance operations, 
such as weeding, spraying against capsids and black 
pod and mistletoe control.  They also provide inputs on 
credit payable during the main harvesting season.  The 
main problem with this type of associations is their low 
capital base for the acquisition of chemicals to improve 
upon their pests and diseases control practices.
     CHALLENGES FACING THE FARMER ASSOCIATIONS
The main limitations of these associations have been 
lack of capital, low level of managerial skills, and lack 
of infrastructure in the form of warehouses for input 
storage and distribution.   Their main need is a stronger 
capital base.  Due to discouraging experiences of many 
farmers as a consequence of the manner in which prin -
ciples of co-operation were disregarded in the past, 
many farmers are sceptical and appear unwilling to get 
involved in formal co-operative activities.  It is on re -
cord, however, that if farmers are given the freehand 
to run their own co-operative societies, they can make 
positive strides in capital mobilization which is essen -
tial for the development of an efficient input delivery 
system to support pest and disease control.  The key 
strategy is therefore farmer education and empower -
ment to apply co-operative principles in their organi -
zations.
•In order to fight against widespread diseases and 
pests in cocoa, farmers frequently use pesticides, 
such as insecticides, fungicides and herbicides in their 
farms. 
•These products can be a serious health hazard for 
the farmer and his family, either through direct contact 
when spraying or by contaminating food or water when 
stored improperly. 
•It is important for farmers to store agrochemicals in 
a safe place and to wear protective clothing when han -
dling and applying agrochemicals
•Training must provide to members and workers who 
handle pesticides and other hazardous chemicals on 
the risks of handling these materials and on how to 
handle them properly. 
1. Training must address: 
a. How to store safely, especially so that the materials 
cannot be reached by children.
b. How to understand the product label and other 
safety instructions made available by the manufacturer. 
Containers should be labelled indicating contents, 
warnings, and intended uses (preferably in the original 
container when possible)
c. how to handle accidents and spills when preparing 
and applying.
  
d. how to handle and safely dispose of empty contain -
ers, including triple rinsing and
e. puncturing containers o intervals of time when peo -
ple are not allowed to enter a sprayed area or field 
without any personal protection equipment. 
•Raise awareness amongst all members and workers 
of the hazards and risks related to pesticides and other 
hazardous chemicals, even if they are not directly han -
dling these materials.
•Pesticides and other hazardous chemicals must not 
be applied within 10 metres from ongoing human activ -
ity (housing, canteens, offices, warehouses or the like).
 
•A buffer zone of at least 10 metres must be kept un -
less there is a barrier that effectively reduces pesticide 
drift. 
•The employer must make work processes, workplaces, 
machinery and equipment on the production site safe. 
•Children under the age of 18 years, pregnant or nurs -
ing women, mentally handicapped people, people with 
chronic, hepatic or renal diseases and people with res -
piratory diseases must not carry out any potentially 
hazardous work. 
•The employer must ensure alternative work for em -
ployees in the case that a change of work is necessary 
to comply with this requirement. 
•The employer must have accessible first aid boxes and 
equipment and a sufficient number of people trained in 
first aid in the workplace at all times. 
•The employer must provide clean drinking water and 
clean toilets with hand washing facilities close by for 
workers, and clean showers for workers who handle 
pesticides. 
 80
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
•These facilities must be separate for women and men 
and the number of facilities must be in proportion to 
the number of workers. 
•The employer must ensure that workers nominate a 
representative who knows about health and safety is -
sues and who will raise workers’ concerns on health 
and safety issues with the organization’s management. 
•The employer must provide training to workers who 
carry out hazardous work on the risks from this work 
to their health, and to the environment, and on what to 
do in case of an accident. 
•The employer must display all information, safety in -
structions, re-entry intervals and hygiene recommen -
dations clearly and visibly in the workplace in the local 
language(s) and with pictograms. 
•The employer must provide and pay for personal pro -
tective equipment for all workers who perform hazard -
ous work. 
•It should be made sure that the personal protective 
equipment (gloves to protect your hands, hat to protect 
the top of your head, overalls (or comfortable clothes) 
to protect your body, arms and legs, Boots to protect 
your feet, goggles to protect your eyes, respirator or 
mask to protect your mouth and nose, facial mask to 
protect your eyes, mouth and nose is used and that re -
placement equipment is ordered and distributed when 
the existing equipment wears out.
    5.3   LIVELIHOOD DIVERSIFICATION
Cocoa farmers depend heavily on income from the sale 
of cocoa beans to meet their needs.  However, it is im -
portant that they also embark on other income gener -
ating activities to supplement that from cocoa and also 
minimise risks. Some of the potential income generat -
ing activities are as follows:
• Bee keeping
• Grasscutter Production
• Mushroom cultivation
• Chilli pepper production
• Snail rearing
• Maize production
• Cassava/gari production 
• Cocoyam
Farmers who are interested in these activities may 
contact their community extension agents to facilitate 
training in any of the above topics.
    5.4   CHILD LABOUR  
CHILD
The different ethnic cultures may define a child differ -
ently but legally, a child is a person below 18 years.
Child labour is:
Work that exploits a child by preventing it from access 
to education and harming its health and/or develop -
ment OR 
Work performed by a child which deprives the child of 
the basic rights, and is abusive, hazardous, exploitative 
and harmful to the health, safety, morals and develop -
ment of the child OR
Work that denies a child of education or does not al -
low the child to benefit fully from school, by way of at -
tempting to combine school with heavy work or work 
for long hours (ILO C138, 182: Children’s Act 1998, Act 
560). 
According to the ILO (International Labour Organisa -
tion of the United Nations), child labour refers to work 
that is mentally, physically, socially or morally harm -
ful to children and interferes with their education by 
preventing them from going to school or by requiring 
them to combine school attendance with excessively 
long and heavy work (ILO Convention 182). 
The minimum age for a child to be legally allowed to 
work is determined by laws in each country and can be 
set at 14, 15 or 16 years. In Ghana, the minimum age for 
employment is 15.
Light work or permissible work is any work that is not 
likely to harm the health and development of the child 
and does not interfere with their school attendance or 
their participation in vocational orientation and train -
ing programmes.
Not all work carried out by children can be considered 
“child labour”. Children can do small tasks (at home 
and on the farm) which are appropriate for their age 
and level of development during non-school hours. In 
rural areas children can be found helping their parents 
with light work in the field or carrying out small tasks 
in the house. This is not child labour as defined by ILO. 
As part of their upbringing, children participate in work 
appropriate to their level of development, and which 
allows them to acquire practical skills and learn to be -
come responsible citizens. Light or acceptable work 
forms part of the socialization process and is beneficial 
to the child’s development, inter-generational transfer 
of skills and future of cocoa production. Such work may 
include helping parents to care for the home, assisting 
in family business, earning pocket money outside of 
school hours and during holidays, and helping parents 
on the farm during weekends and school holidays.
 81
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
AGE 
GROUP
ACTIVITY/TASK RECOMMENDATION
                           
13-14
May accompany parents to the farm during weekends or holidays 
but do not undertake any specific task
Assisting in taking care of babies and toddlers on the farm
Helping in cooking and serving food
Running farm errands
Picking harvested pods from under cocoa trees in the company of 
adults
Uprooting weeds around young cocoa plants
Filling nursery bags with black soil/loam Adequate training
Fetching water for spraying and leaving the farm before spraying 
commences
Under  adult supervision
Gathering cocoa pods
Scooping and removing beans
Carting minor loads
Watering seedlings at the nursery
15-17
Assisting in planting cocoa (require adequate training) Under adult supervision
Weeding /brushing undergrowth with age-appropraiate cutlass 
(sua-ado or small cutlass)
Plucking pods within hand-reach
Breaking cocoa pods with breaking mallet or hitting on the ground
Carting load:
      a.  seedling for planting
Weight carried should not 
exceed 30% of body weight for 
more than 2miles (3km)
      b.  water for spraying
      c.  cocoa pods for heaping
      d.  fermented beans to drying mat
      e.  dry beans for sale
PERMISSIBLE WORK IN COCOA PRODUCTION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
(Various age categories below 18 years)
             ABUSE OF CHILD RIGHTS
Every child has a right to education, a decent livelihood, 
development and protection, but this is not always the 
reality in cocoa growing areas (Children’s Act 1998, Act 
560). As various reports 1  pointed out, many children 
in West African cocoa areas are engaged in the worst 
forms of child labour, for example in hazardous work 
that is dangerous to their health, safety and devel -
opment. These children carry heavy loads, work long 
hours in the sun, and some of them are even trapped in 
forced labour on cocoa farms. 
These children typically lack any opportunity for educa -
tion, leaving them with no way out of poverty. Educa -
tion for a child is an important step towards securing 
opportunities and a decent livelihood as an adult.
Many consumers around the world put pressure on the 
big chocolate manufacturers to take tangible and con -
crete steps to put an end to worst forms of child labour 
in the cocoa sector. 
If the worst forms of child labour continue, producers 
may find it difficult to market their cocoa as consumers 
are increasingly aware that they do not want to con -
sume products made from child labour. 
Moreover, child labour constitutes a violation of chil -
dren’s basic rights enshrined in national laws and in -
ternational conventions. 
There exists an international cocoa initiative against 
the worst forms of child labour.
1E.g. Payson Center for international Development and Technol -
ogy Transfer of Tulane University, 2007:First annual report: Over -
sight of public and private initiatives to eliminate the worst forms 
of child labor in the cocoa sector of Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana; ILO 
2005: Combating child labour in cocoa growing
 82
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
                  WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOUR
Child labour may appear in many different forms. One 
category of child labour is referred to as “the worst 
forms of child labour“ and is defined as work which, 
by its nature or the circumstances in which it is carried 
out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of a 
child. The ILO Convention No. 182 defines the following 
four classes of work as the worst forms of child labour 
(WFCL):
1. All forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, 
such as the sale and trafficking of children, debt bond -
age and serfdom and forced or compulsory labour, in -
cluding forced or compulsory recruitment of children 
for use in armed conflict.
2. The use, procuring or offering of a child for prostitu -
tion, for the production of pornography or for porno -
graphic performances.
3. He use, procuring or offering of a child for illicit activ -
ities, in particular for the production and trafficking of 
drugs as defined in the relevant international treaties.
4. Work which, by its nature or the circumstances in 
which it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safe -
ty or morals of children (hazardous work). 2  
Eliminating these worst forms of child labour should  
receive the most urgent attention, according to the 171 
countries that have ratified ILO Convention 182.Article 
3 of ILO Convention No. 182 calls for immediate pro -
hibition of the worst forms of child labour by enacting 
laws, regulations and standards.
Convention 182 therefore states, among others, that 
hazardous work should not be done by persons young -
er than 18 years, but calls for special attention to girls.
Categories 1, 2 and 3 are unconditional WFCL  which are 
illegal activities defined and prohibited internationally 
for both children and adults work. These demand im -
mediate arrest.
Category 4 refers to Hazardous Work  and is one of the 
WFCL. It is work that poses danger to the health, safe -
ty or morals of a person.  It could also be a legitimate 
work, but in dangerous or unhealthy conditions that 
could result in a child being killed or injured, maimed 
or made ill as a result of poor safety and health stand -
ards and working conditions. In cocoa production, work 
that is hazardous for the health and safety of children 
includes:
a. Pesticides application. Children should not be al -
lowed to apply pesticides on cocoa farms. They may 
fetch water for spraying but MUST not be present dur -
ing the spraying. 
b. Removal of mistletoes. Children using ladder to 
climb cocoa trees to cut mistletoes is hazardous work 
and not acceptable
c. Carrying heavy loads. Children should NOT car -
ry weights which are MORE THAN 30% of their body 
weight. For appropriate loads, the walking distance 
should not be more than 3km.
d. Use of inappropriate tools. Machetes (cutlasses) and 
other tools must be of the size and make that children 
can use. 
2Sources:  
ILO Conventions No. 105 on Abolition of Forced Labour (1957), No. 
138 on minimum age for labor (1973); No. 182 on the worst forms 
of child labor (1999);
STCP, 2002: Child Labor in the Cocoa Sector of West Africa
STCP, 2005: Learning about Sustainable Cocoa Production: A Guide 
for Participatory Farmer Training,
CRIG, 2010: Cocoa Manual, a source book for sustainable cocoa 
production
Republic of Ghana,Ministry of Manpower, Youth and Employment, 
2008: Hazardous Child Labour Activity Framework for the Cocoa 
Sector in Ghana (HAF)
            CHILD LABOUR IN GHANA
Most countries have signed international agreements 
with the ILO that state that children aged 12-15 are 
permitted to carry out “light work” which is not likely 
to harm their health or development or attendance at 
school. In Ghana, the following national laws and pro -
grammes exist to protect children against abuse and 
exploitation:
•The Children’s Act, 1998 (Act 560) protects the rights 
of all children in Ghana and regulates various aspects 
of their development.
•The Labour Act, 2005 (Act 651) makes provisions for 
the protection of young persons, i.e. persons aged be -
tween 18 and 21, from engaging in hazardous work.
•The Human Trafficking Act, 2005 (Act 694) protects 
children and adults against trafficking within and out -
side Ghana.
•The Domestic Violence Act, 2007 (Act 732) protects 
 83
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
children from being abused in the domestic setting. 
This may include protecting children from worst forms 
of child labour that may take place within the household.
•The National Programme for the Elimination of Worst 
Forms of Child Labour in Cocoa (NPECLC) provides a na -
tional framework for eliminating WFCL.
•The Hazardous Child Labour Activity Framework for 
the Cocoa Sector in Ghana (HAF).
FACTORS FOR DETERMINING CHILD LABOUR
1. Age: three groupings for admission to various cat -
egories of work [Section 89 of the Children’s Act, 1998 
(Act 560)] 
• Children who are 13 years and above can do light 
work (work which is not harmful to the child’s health or 
development and does not affect the child’s school at -
tendance or capacity to benefit from school work):
• Children who are 15 years and above can be employed 
in normal work:
• Children who are 18 years and above can do hazard -
ous work
2. Type of work (whether or not it exposes the child to 
hazards)
3. Working condition and environment (whether or not 
the environment is healthy)
PROHIBITED ACTIONS HEALTH AND OTHER IMPLICATION OF EXPOSURE
Working on the farm for more than 3 hours per day or 
more than 18 hours per week (for children on week -
ends, holidays and/or for those who have completed 
school).
Predisposition to errors leading to accidents and inju -
ries, increased exhaustion affect education and health 
(even hired adults work for maximum of 4-6 hours)
For children in school, working more than 2 hours/ 
day on a school day.
Working without adequate basic protective clothing 
for their feet and body (e.g. long sleeves, trousers and 
‘Afro Moses’)
Injury from thorns, tree stumps, snake and other 
reptile bites, insect bites, contact with toxic irritant 
plants.
A child working alone on the farm in isolation (i.e. 
beyond visible or audible range of nearest adult)
Prone to abduction, defilement, indecent assault and 
rape; no help in case of injury or accident.
Going to or returning from the farm alone or working 
on farm between 6.00pm and 6.00am
Poor visibility leading to slips and falls, snake bites 
and injuries.
A child withdrawn from school during cocoa season to do 
farm work.
Child losing out on education, leads to school dropouts 
and failures
Working full time on farm and not attending formal/ non-
formal school (applicable to children under 15 years)
Increases tendency to participate in hazardous work, 
deprivation of the benefits of education.
HAZARDOUS COCOA WORK LIST (PROHIBITED FOR BELOW 18 YEARS)- GENERAL ISSUES 
4. Working tools (whether or not the machines or 
equipment are dangerous)
5. Working hours-Children should not work:
• At night (8pm to 6am)[Sect 88 of Act 560]
• For long hours i.e. more than 2 hours during school 
days or 3 hours during non-school days .
          WHAT ARE THE CAUSES OF CHILD LABOUR?
The causes of child labour are manifold but grouped 
under five main groups:
ECONOMIC FACTORS: 
Low agricultural productivity, insufficient financial 
management skills (e.g. lack of savings), lack of access 
to financial services and lack of business skills (how to 
run the farm as a business) are some of the contribut -
ing factors to low farming incomes. 
Low incomes may force some farmers to reduce costs 
of labour by using their own children or employing other 
children as they are paid little or nothing for their work.
Children work in cocoa production mainly because their 
parents and adult relatives do not earn enough to sup -
port the family and to employ adult labour for the cocoa 
farm. 
INADEQUACIES IN EDUCATION SYSTEM: 
Lack of access to relevant quality education. There are 
inadequate schools, not enough teachers, school fees 
and other costs, etc.
 84
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
SOCIO-CULTURAL FACTORS: 
Structural inequalities, gender-based discrimination as 
well as lack of education on the part of the parents may 
constrain them from seeing the necessity to send their 
children to school. Sometimes parents are not aware of 
the dangers of involving children in certain activities. 
The children of sharecroppers, migrants and season -
al workers are particularly at risk to have to work on 
farms, as their families usually are poor and need their 
children’s help to improve incomes.
NATURAL DISASTERS: 
Conflict, the HIV/AIDS epidemic, environmental disas -
ters may predispose children to child labour.
WEAK INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES:  
Poor law enforcement may exacerbate child labour 
conditions
            WHY SHOULD COCOA FARMERS PREVENT                          
            CHILD LABOUR?
•The consequences of child labour are that it creates 
a cycle of poverty, puts children at unacceptable risks, 
and negatively affects their future since it may prevent 
them from getting education resulting in high illiteracy, 
and/or a healthy physical and psychological develop -
ment. This means that these children will later find it 
difficult to improve their living conditions because they 
lack the necessary education.
•It should be understood that children are exposed to 
higher risks of accidents than adults during work be -
cause of their lack of work experience and knowledge 
of hazards, and how to prevent them. As the bodies of 
children are still growing, carrying heavy loads and us -
ing heavy tools can lead to serious or even permanent 
injuries and malfunctioning of organs.
•Children are also much more vulnerable to the ex -
posure of pesticides than adults. Chronic long-term 
health effects from exposure to pesticides may only 
appear much later and affect the health and livelihood 
of the child and its family. 
        WHAT CAN FARMERS AND COCOA COMMUNITIES             
        DO TO PREVENT WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOUR?
•First of all, farmers have to understand that children 
who are engaged in child labour (as defined above) are 
prevented from developing their bodies and minds 
healthily in a way that they become successful, respon -
sible members of the community. 
•Nourishing the children healthily and allowing them 
to go to school regularly is probably the best and most 
important thing parents and guardians can do. Children 
may be engaged in cocoa farming but not in the execu -
tion of hazardous activities, or in work that negatively 
affects their education.
•Farmers can also do a lot to improve their living con -
ditions so that they don’t need to resort to child labour. 
•Education (formal and informal and both for parents 
and children) is the key to overcome child labour and 
to improve the family’s livelihood. Wherever possible, 
farmers (both men and women) should take part in 
educational programmes offered by the government or 
NGO’s. 
•Forming or joining farmer groups and organisations 
helps to discuss this issue and to learn from each other. 
•The development of Internal Management Sys tems 
(IMS) could provide proactive alerts to farmers of child 
labour and ways to address it, in particular commu -
nities where this form of labour remains common. 
Communities can organise themselves to monitor the 
existence of the worst forms of child labour and take 
action if necessary. 
•The individual farmer can reduce the dependence on 
cheap labour by improving the productivity of his farm 
and hence income through keenly following advice on 
good agricultural practices as described in this curricu -
lum. 
•Farmers should learn to understand their farms as a 
business in order to better plan expenditures and in -
comes, and to improve their savings ratios, which is 
necessary for investing further in their cocoa farms or 
in alternative income generating activities.
         MEASURES FOR ELIMINATING CHILD LABOUR
•Raise awareness among producers to dialogue with 
them on worst forms of child labour (WFCL), child la -
bour and the importance of education. 
•Where there are indicators of exploitation/traffick -
ing of children, the farmer group/organisation reports 
these cases to the relevant authorities. 
•Children who are carrying out work on the farm must 
always be accompanied and supervised by one of their 
parents, a legal guardian, or an authorized adult.
•The farmer group/organisation employing young 
workers aged between 15 and 17 (Ghana) must keep 
 85
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Adapted from Amoo (2008)
No. Recommendations
1. All children of school going age should be in school and should not go to the farm during school 
hours or go to a distant farm before or after school or be withdrawn to do farm work in peak sea -
sons. Children from the age 12 can do light (age recommended as permissible) work but not for 
more than 2 hours and preferably after school.
2. All children who accompany their parents to the farm should be provided with basic protective clothing 
at least to protect their feet and body.
3. Ideally, provide bite-proof protective boots with non-skid soles to prevent snake bites, slips and 
falls e.g. children’s wellington boots. In the absence of this ‘Afro Moses’, canvas or any boot is 
recommended. Going to farm barefoot is hazardous and bathroom slippers are not acceptable. 
4. Body protection in the form of trousers, long sleeves and long dresses is recommended.
5. Sun hat is recommended on hot and sunny days
6. Incorporate at least 10 minute breaks hourly for children in the different acceptable age  categories; they 
should not work for more than 3 hours a day
7. Adults must sufficiently train a child for any farm work (even the basic ones) before assigning duties.
8. Ensure adequate intake of drinking water hourly to prevent heat stress.
9. Load carried should not exceed 30% of body weight if farm is far (>2 miles or 3km). If the farm is farther, 
reduce carrying weight or have rest stops.
10. Lifting /handling/ carrying loads over short distance (500m) should not exceed 50% of body weight.
11. In assigning permissible load to a child, adequate adjustment is required if the terrain is unfriendly. This 
is particularly the case in hilly and slippery terrains when it rains. It is also applies when crossing a river 
with heavy loads.
12. Stop children below 18 years from working with pesticides, even if Personal Protective Equipment is 
provided.
13. Children should stay at distances where they do not smell pesticides. Fetching water for sprayers dur-
ing spraying when sprayers run out of water is inacceptable.
14. Sick children should not be made to work under   any circumstance.
15. Attaining 18 years is no license to engage in all cocoa activities. Persons 18-24 years should be well 
protected, and engagement in any hazardous farm work should be graded until maturity, experience and 
training permits.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHILD PARTICIPATION IN COCOA PRODUCTION
records including date of birth, names of parents or le -
gal guardian, place of origin and permanent residence.
In addition to the above measures the hazardous child 
labour framework has provided a number of recom -
mendations which will serve as a guide to parents and 
guardians with respect to children’s involvement in co -
coa activities.
 86
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fig 21.1: Children accompanying parents to the 
farm (This is acceptable)
Fig 21.2: Children carrying loads in cocoa 
communities in Ghana (Credit: MMYE, 2008)
Fig 21.3: Range of baskets and machetes (cut -
lasses) used by various age groups in cocoa 
communities in Ghana (Credit: MMYE, 2008)
Fig 21.4: Community sensitization on 
child labour in a cocoa community 
(Credit: MMYE, 2008)

 87
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
     6.1   TRACEABILITY
To monitor and provide feedback on quality issues, it is 
necessary to be able to know where cocoa beans were 
produced. Ideally, it should be possible to trace a lot of 
beans from the end user back to the farmer or farmer 
group who produced it. However, the smallholder na -
ture of the crop and the mixing and blending export 
systems make traceability a difficult task. 
Consumer expectation means that cocoa and cocoa 
products have to be of the highest quality. Govern -
ments, consumer organisations, health experts, and the 
media are taking an increased interest in food safety 
and in residue and contaminant issues which might 
cause damage to health. Therefore, in a sustainable co -
coa economy, cocoa quality with respect to food safety 
is of paramount importance, exceeding even physical 
and flavour quality needs. The cocoa supply chain has 
several features which make the implementation of 
quality and food safety standards difficult.
        6.2   CERTIFICATION OF SUSTAINABLE COCOA
CERTIFICATION AND TRACEABILITY
Certification is a procedure by which an independent 
inspection body gives a certificate that a farm, farmer 
group, processing facility, trader, importer or exporter 
has been assessed and is adhering to specific stand -
ards (e. g. such as Fairtrade International (FLO), UTZ 
Certified, or Rainforest Alliance (RA). The certification is 
intended to ensure that the cocoa sold under the seal 
of the standard organisation does actually originate 
from a farm or operation that produces according to 
the relevant standards. Certified producers and trad -
ers of cocoa must show documentary traceability, i.e. 
contracts, bills of lading, delivery notes, invoices, etc. 
that show where a product was sourced and to where 
it was sold. The independent inspection body checks 
the documentation to make sure equivalent amounts 
of sustainable cocoa were bought and sold, thus track -
ing the quantity of sustainable cocoa through the sup -
ply chain.
Certification is the process of confirmation and rec -
ognition given to an individual, organization, process, 
service, or product or farm that it meets certain estab -
lished criteria, often through external (third party) 
assessment of compliance to a standard and often 
voluntary.  In simple terms, Certification is a procedure 
that helps farmers to follow good farming practices. 
These farmers receive a certificate from a certification 
organization.
                            WHY CERTIFICATION?
People who buy products made from cocoa do not want 
cocoa that was produced by bad practices, such as de -
stroying the forest, using worst forms of child labour or 
not treating workers well.  In effect people who buy co -
coa and chocolate want cocoa that has been produced 
under the following conditions: 
i. Good agricultural practices (examples are: pruning, 
weeding, sanitation, safe use of chemicals, fertilisa -
tion.)
 
ii. Good environmental practices (examples are: water 
and forest protection, safe waste disposal.)
iii.  Good social practices (examples are: sending 
children to school, fair treatment of workers, keeping 
records.) 
Farmers who want their produced certified are required 
to adopt good agricultural practices and best environ -
mental practices, promote the health and safety of 
farm workers and ensure quality of produce. In effect 
people (social), planet (environment) and profits (pro -
ductivity) must be sustainably managed well. Certified 
cocoa earns farmers extra income in addition to what 
Ghana Cocoa Board pays.
BENEFITS OF CERTIFICATION TO FARMERS
Farmers who undertake certification stand the chance 
to get higher yields and better quality of their beans, 
leading to higher incomes. 
With better records, the group can manage themselves 
better and will discipline themselves to follow the good 
advice of the cocoa extension agents.
TRACEABILITY AND COCOA CERTIFICATION 6.0
 88
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Farmers are assured of better living and working con -
ditions. Health and safety of the farmers are ensured 
and labour rights are respected.
By respecting the social and environmental criteria/re -
quirements, the families and communities in the cocoa 
farming areas will enjoy a higher quality of life, with 
greater female participation, better educated children, 
protected biodiversity and more sustainable access to 
natural resources.
Farmers will get higher yields and better quality of 
their beans, leading to higher incomes.
Farmers are able to learn from each other, better man -
age their farms and solicit support for their groups. 
As a group, the farmers may be able to negotiate better 
prices for farm inputs or gain better access to credit.
Benefits of certification to consumers 
Consumers have better and clear information about 
food origin (traceability). 
Consumers trust in produce quality is assured and 
there are reduced risks to their health and safety. 
        6.3   STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
 
There are 4 main steps to certification
Extension agents must help farmers
1. Organized farmer group
Explain to farmers what certification entails and the 
benefits thereof. Each farmer can decide, if he or she 
wants to join the group or not. The group members dis -
cuss, if they want to get certified or not.  
2. Develop an Internal Control System (ICS)
Farmers develop their own ICS. An ICS is a system with -
in the farmers’ group that helps individual members to 
manage their farms and comply with the certification 
requirements. The group can only function, if all of its 
members follow the rules of the group.  The ICS makes 
certification easier and less expensive. Some stand -
ards organizations (Rainforest Alliance and UTZ Cer -
tified) require a full ICS, Fairtrade only requires some 
elements of it.
ICS ensures farmers have records of their farms and 
activities. These include:
•a register of all group members and a map of all the 
farms 
•a profile of each farmer and her/his farm (including 
history and data on land use)
•Information about production: both past and esti -
mates for the next harvest
•A copy of each farmer’s commitment to work towards 
the certificate 
•Information about the training received by the farmer 
•Information about which inputs have been applied to 
the farm
•Reports of any farm inspections 
•A list of chemicals / fertilisers recommended by the 
extension agent 
•Records of any group decisions relating to the certifi -
cation activities 
•A diagram explaining who is responsible for certifica -
tion activities
•Information about the traceability system
•Information about how any ‘premium’ is used to ben -
efit the farmers
3. Organize inspections  
The group organizes inspection. There are two inspec -
tions:
a. An internal inspection which is done by the ICS in -
spector, who can be a member of the group 
b. An external inspection that is done by an independ -
ent inspection company.  
4. Apply for certification
If the group wants to get certified, then they must ap -
ply for certification to one or several of the standards 
(Rainforest Alliance, UTZ Certified, Fairtrade, Global 
GAP). Each standard has its own criteria or require -
ments. 
The different certificates reflect the different concerns 
of the people buying the cocoa, for example: 
(1) social issues (e.g. the worst forms of child labour); 
(2) environmental issues (e.g. protecting natural re -
sources like water); 
(3) sustainable farming methods (e.g. integrated pest 
management and good soil conservation practices to 
maintain soil fertility for tomorrow’s cocoa farmers); 
(4) fairer/minimum prices for the farmer; or 
(5) a mixture of all of these concerns (1) – (4)
An individual farmer can get certified but more ex -
pensive. Group certification is less costly. A group of 
farmers can also work towards achieving two or more 
certificates at the same time. This would increase their 
chances of selling the cocoa at a premium, as they 
would gain access to a larger sha re of the market for 
certified cocoa.
 89
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
WHICH TYPES OF CERTIFICATION EXIST AND HOW CAN I FIND OUT MORE?
Rainforest Alliance
www.rainforest-alliance.org
The Rainforest Alliance  works to conserve biodiversity and ensure 
sustainable livelihoods by transforming land-use practices, business 
practices and consumer behavior. Farmer groups that participate in 
its programs meet rigorous standards that conserve biodiversity and 
ensure sustainable livelihoods.
Farms that meet its comprehensive standards for sustainability earn 
the Rainforest Alliance Certified TM seal. These standards conserve bio -
diversity; ensure that soils, waterways and wildlife habitats are pro -
tected; and ensure that the rights and welfare of workers, their families 
and communities are protected.
The Rainforest Alliance  certificate therefore encourages cocoa farm -
ing practices that are sustainable over the long term by maintaining a 
healthy environment, decent working conditions and protecting local 
communities.
UTZ Certified
www.utzcertified.org
The UTZ Certified  vision is to support cocoa farmers to become profes -
sionals implementing good practices which lead to better businesses, 
whilst also addressing social and environmental issues.
Therefore the UTZ Certified  certificate focuses on rewarding cocoa 
farmer groups that practice sustainable farming methods (as outlined 
in previous chapters of this manual), and includes criteria relating to 
social and environmental issues too. 
Premiums received for UTZ Certified cocoa are spent in a way that 
clearly benefits all certified producers, in cash and/or in kind.
For more information contact:
WAFF represents UTZ Certified  in Ghana:
admin@waffco.org or 021 232376
IMO Social & FairTrade Certification
www.fairforlife.net
IMO Social & FairTrade Certification guarantees that human rights are 
guaranteed at any stage of production, that workers enjoy good and fair 
working conditions and that smallholder farmers receive a fair share. 
Fairtrade improves the livelihood of thousands of smallholder farmers 
and workers by providing the means for social community projects and 
empowerment of people.
For more information contact: 
Aaron Ampofo, aaronipapa2@yahoo.com or 0244…

 90
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Fair Trade
www.fairtrade.net
Fair Trade  is an organized social movement and market-based ap -
proach that aims to help producers in developing countries and pro -
mote sustainability. The movement advocates the payment of a higher 
price to producers as well as social and environmental standards in 
areas related to the production of a wide variety of goods. 
Fair Trade  certified cocoa must be grown and harvested in accordance 
with the international Fairtrade  standards set by FLO International. 
The supply chain must also have been monitored by FLO-CERT, to en -
sure the integrity of labelled products.
• The minimum price paid for Fair Trade  certified cocoa is guar -
anteed, so if prices for conventional cocoa drop below this level, farm -
ers receive a better price for their cocoa.
• The Fairtrade  premium is used by farmer groups for social and 
economic investments within their communities.
• Pre-harvest lines of credit are given to the farmer groups, if 
requested, of up to 60% of the purchase price
For more information contact:
Edward Akapire, Liaison Officer, FLO International
e.akapire @fairtrade.netor 0208493339 / 0243523300
Organic certificates
Organic certification addresses a growing worldwide demand for or -
ganic food. The criteria vary for each organic certificate, and generally 
involve a set of production standards for growing, storage, processing, 
packaging and shipping that include:
• avoidance of most synthetic chemical inputs (e.g. fertilizer, 
pesticides, antibiotics, food additives, etc), genetically modified organ -
isms, and the use of sewage sludge;
• use of farmland that has been free from chemicals for a num -
ber of years (often three or more);
• maintaining strict physical separation of organic products from 
non-certified products.
For more information contact:
Ghana Organic Agricultural Network, 
adimadosam@yahoo.com or 0244 580 720; coordinated by Agro Eco-
Louis Bolk Institute Ghana@louisbolk.org or Agro Eco Ghana@agroeco.
net. -0302786097; or Dr. Defenzi Schandorf - 0206369244

 91
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
  6.4 RECORD KEEPING AND TYPES OF FARM RECORDS 
It is impossible for the human mind in spite of tre -
mendous power to remember or recall everything all 
the time. Record keeping is therefore essential for any 
form of organization. Farm record can serve as a pow -
erful tool in farm organization. By keeping records and 
recording important information, the farmers can ana -
lyze the information to identify possible problems and 
take corrective actions.Some of the main use that farm 
record can be put to include the following:
•Planning purposes – guide for future decision making.
•Calculating cost and benefits – ascertaining the finan -
cial positions of the farm. This can then be used a basis 
for determining the credit worthiness of the business 
and for purposes of taxation.
•Budgeting purposes – future targets and projections.
•National statistics and national planning – lack of any 
reliable farm level data has been one of the greatest 
constraints to agricultural production and hence eco -
nomic development of most developing countries. Lack 
of accurate data from the farm sector can contribute 
partly to poor performance of economic predictions in 
many third world countries, and this is because the 
farm sector is usually the largest sector of their econo -
mies, contributing a substantial portion of the national 
product and employing the largest percentage of their 
labour force. 
•Environmental regulations: Increasingly, farm owners 
are being asked to keep records about chemical use, 
livestock waste applications and irrigation water use 
on their farms. This is particularly becoming increas -
ingly important for certification in cocoa.
SELECTING A RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM
Selecting a record-keeping system should depend on 
the expected use of the records. There is no best record 
keeping system for all situations, however, a farm re -
cords system should: 
1. Provide accurate and necessary information
2. Fit into the farm organization or framework
3. Be available in a form to aid decision making
Generally, records should be easy to keep and should 
give the necessary information when required.Depend -
ing on farm size and affordability, record keeping could 
be carried out by clerks employed by the farmer or by 
the farmer’s educated children or by the farmer himself 
5.4 RECORD KEEPING AND TYPES OF FARM RECORDS
if educated.Very simple forms of record keeping like 
using pieces of sticks, marbles and pebbles have been 
used over the ages by African farmers to count crop 
yields and number of animals.However, with increas -
ing monetization of the economy and share of farm 
produce ending up in the market, more modern means 
of record keeping, involving the use of paper, need to 
be encouraged in addition to the simple traditional re -
cord keeping. This could be done even with small note 
books.
1. Records of farm assets and liabilities, income  
 and financial records coming under the general  
 heading – farm accounting.
2. Production records, including crops and live 
 stock where applicable.
3. Labour records
4. Supplementary records
FARM ACCOUNTING
The basic concepts of farm accounting include:
a. Cost concept, where the farmer records the amount 
he actually pays for the good or service or how much he 
is paid for his produce. The opportunity cost of produce 
consumed by the farmer, gifts and labour used by the 
farmer in production are all important components of 
this concept in the African context and must be con -
sidered.
b. Dual aspect concept where assets of the farm must 
always be equal to equities. Equities consist of liabili -
ties which are what the farm owes to its creditors and 
owners equities which are what the farm owes to its 
owner. The owners’ equity or net worth is that share 
which belongs to the farmer or the owner.
c. Consistency concept where methods and concepts 
used in keeping records are consistent.
Records of assets and liabilities involve identification, 
quantifying and valuations of all inputs and outputs 
from the farm.Depreciation of machinery and equip -
ment and other long term assets of the farm must 
be taken into account.Financial Records are normally 
used to derive balanced sheet and income statement. 
All transactions of the farm may be kept in an impro -
vised book or an accounts book called the journal. The 
journal records all receipts and expenses of the farm 
during a period and is sometimes called the daily diary. 
It records all transactions chronologically or on a day to 
day basis. An example is shown below for a small farm 
in Table 20.5.1
 92
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
In addition to the journal, another record can be kept on 
all produce used by the farmer’s family. This is particu -
larly important in the African context since a greater 
portion of the farm produce is consumed by family. In 
the same vain all inputs supplied by the farmer’s fam -
ily for production purpose must also be recorded. An 
illustration is shown in  Table 20.5.2.
No. ITEM     DATE   AMOUNT REMARKS
1. Purchased spray -
ing Machine from 
Agricare
   4/8/97   ¢150,000 Expenses
2. 100 crates of eggs 
sold to Mr. Haruna
   11/8/97   ¢500,000 Revenue 
3. Poultry feed bought 
Kumasi central 
market
    25/8/97   ¢250,000 Expenses 
TABLE20.5.1: JOURNAL OF ANCHIRINAH FARMS
Month: August, 1997                                                                                    
TABLE 20.5.2: FARM PRODUCE USED BY FAMILY AND HOME SUPPLIED FARM INPUTS FOR ANCHIRINAH FARMS:
DATE ITEM VALUE REMARKS
8/3/2009 5  bowls of millet Gh¢3 consumed by home
9/3/2009 1 crate of eggs Gh¢5 consumed by home
13/3/2009 2 goats for Logori Festival Gh¢60 Consumed by extended 
family
16/3/2009 Maize seed supplied Gh¢3.5 Used for maize farm
Month: April, 2009                                                                     
Total home supplied input for month = Part of cost of production of the farm
Also a separate account may be kept for debtors and 
creditors along side the exact amount of cash or in -
puts owned to the farmer and/or his creditors. For very 
large farms, ledgers may be kept. A ledger is a principal 
book for farm accounts into which transactions from 
the journal may be transferred. At the end of the year 
or the farming season, income statements and balance 
sheet can be prepared to give the farmer a better idea 
of his/her income and general progress in farming.
A balance sheetis a statement shows the financial 
position of the farm at any point in time, e.g. balance 
sheet of Anchirinah farms as at 31st December, 2009.
The uses of the balance sheet to farmer include the 
following:
1. It shows the need for reorganization or liquidation 
of the farm especially for commercial and large scale 
farms.
2. It shows the lender or the Agricultural Development 
Bank the extent of risk involved in extending credit.
3. It may establish the kind and amount of credit that 
is needed.
4. It may also be used for taxation purposes
Balance sheet computation also involves assembling 
both assets and liabilities.
PRODUCTION RECORDS
Though income and finance records are essential for 
 93
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
TABLE 20.5.3: A GENERAL SIMPLE LIVESTOCK RECORD BOOK FOR A SMALL LIVESTOCK FARM
CLASS OF 
ANIMALS 
NO AT THE 
BEGINNING
BOUGHT OR 
RECEIVED AS 
GIFT
BORN TOTAL DIED SALES OR 
SLAUGHTERED 
PRESENT NO.
(a) (b) (c) (d)=a+b+c (e) (f) d-(e+f)
Goat 20 2 1 23 3 5 15
Sheep
Poultry
Pigs
Rabbits
Other
Month: April, 2004                                                                  
TABLE 20.5.4: LABOUR CHART FOR HIRED FARM WORKERS ON A FAR
Date Worker’s 
Name
Duration of 
work (hrs)
Nature of 
work
Payment in 
kind (food/
drinks, etc)
Payment 
in cash
Total payment
15/3/09 Akua 
Fokuo
7 Weeding 4 12 16
16/3/09 Kwame 
Doogo
8 Harvesting 5 18 23
“ “ “ “ “ “ “
“ “ “ “ “ “ “
“ “ “ “ “ “ “
“ “ “ “ “ “ “
“ “ “ “ “ “ “
the planning and control of the farm, special types of 
records are needed for production of crops and live -
stock on the farm. They are called Production Records 
and are made up of crop and livestock records if the 
size of livestock farm is large.Crop records normally 
contain details of crops grown such as varieties, the 
date of planting and harvest, the amount of seeds and 
other inputs used in the production process and yields.
Livestock records should be kept and ideally separated 
from different types of records. They may be kept for 
each livestock enterprise and may involve special re -
cords for feed intake, antibiotics among others. Record 
of diseases may also be kept. An example of general 
live stock records is shown in Table 20.5.3
LABOUR RECORDS
These may be separately kept from all other records 
and should include payments made in cash or in kind. 
A wage book may also be kept specifically for all hired 
labour used on the farm. Record of non-hired labour 
which includes those of family and communal labour 
must also be kept.Refer to Table 20.5.4 for an example 
of a seasonal labour record chart for hired farm labour.
Past labour records can act as guide in determining 
labour requirements of particular crop and live stock 
enterprises for future planning purposes.
 94
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
SUPPLEMENT RECORDS
These are records kept because of their special role in 
farming and may include soil maps, farm map, specif -
ics from field maps, rainfall data, records for land and 
legal documentsand any special records of any part of 
the farm. Tape recorded oral history and written his -
tory of land acquisition and procurement by previous 
and past clan lineages and elders of land may be kept 
so as to aid future possible land litigation or other legal 
problems. With emerging issues like certification some 
of these records may become increasingly important.
FARM RECORDS ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
It will be of no use and in fact a complete waste of time 
and resources by merely keeping records if they are not 
analysed to identify problems and seek their solutions. 
These will help prevent waste and improve efficiency 
by aiding general management decisions to control and 
evaluate current or projected farm plans and to help in 
planning of possible expansion of the farm.Analysis of 
farm records may be done by computing several meas -
ures. Standards of comparison with these computed 
measures may be the budgeted objectives, standards 
set by the farmers themself or certain technically 
achievable optimums from research and/or extension.    
Some of the measures that farms record can be used to 
compute include the following:
a) Net farm Income which is the difference between 
the total farm revenues and total expenses. Net re -
turns per various factors of production like labour, land 
and capital can also be computed. These net returns 
ratios can then be used to compare a particular farm 
with other farms or with the average or a model farm 
to determine whether the farm is doing reasonably well 
compared with the other farms in the area.
b) Efficiency of crop production is analysis of records 
on crops to compute measures such as a crop yield per 
hectare, returns per hectare and net returns per hectare.
Other measures include the crop yield index defined as:
Crop Yield Index (CYI)   = [(Actual Crop Yield)/Normal or 
average crop yield] x 100 
If CYI is grater than 100%, then actual crop yield is 
higher than average or normal crop yield. The reverse 
is also true.
c) Labour efficiency measuresinclude total labour costs 
per hectare of crop, net returns per manday employ -
ment on the farm, amount of work accomplished by 
each hired labour and input index. 
Labour input index may be defined as the amount of 
work accomplished by a particular worker divided by 
the amount of work completed by standard or aver -
age worker within a given period of time. Such an index 
may help in some cases to determine whether a worker 
is intentionally slack on the job or some thing is pre -
venting him from doing average work.
The importance of farm record keeping in any farm 
enterprise cannot be over emphasized. These records 
are essential not only at the farm level but for nation -
al planning as well. The current focus of development 
thinking is that, if development is to take place in the 
third world and become self-sustaining then it has to 
start in the rural areas in general and in the agricul -
tural sector in particular which is the main source of 
livelihood of the rural majority. No proper or meaning -
ful planning can be done based on wrong and unreli -
able assumptions or data as these will certainly lead to 
wrong conclusions and projections. What happens in 
the agricultural sector therefore have serious implica -
tions for the other sectors of the economy. Adequate 
and reliable farm level data will help in efficient pro -
duction, and allocation of resources through an effi -
cient marketing system.
 95
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
            7.1   PESTICIDE RESIDUES
Pesticide residue is the amount of the active ingredi -
ents that remain on or in the produce after a given pes -
ticide has been used to protect the produce.  The level 
of such residue left in or on the produce depends on 
the pesticide concerned and the method of application.  
Pesticide residues dominate the food safety issues on 
cocoa in Ghana. Production of high quality cocoa re -
quires the judicious use of protective pesticide applica -
tions to ensure the quality and yield of the crop. Cocoa 
attracts a lot of pests and disease agents, so the crop 
must be protected with proprietary products approved 
by COCOBOD.  Risks associated with use of chemicals 
must be managed so that they do not harm the users, 
damage the environment or poison consumers.  
Pesticides need to be applied in a safe and sustainable 
way that does not threaten the health of the operators 
using them, present risks to the environment, or result 
in illegal residues.  The allowable level of pesticide resi -
due in any produce with special reference to cocoa de -
pends on the class of the pesticide in question. Hence 
different levels of different pesticides are permitted in 
cocoa.  The safety aspects including real and potential 
risks to growers and consumers have led to the need 
for regulatory measures in the form of determination 
of Maximum Residue Levels (MRLs).  All cocoa export to 
the EU, Japan and elsewhere can be subjected to anal -
ysis to detect the presence and quantity of chemical 
residues.   In the EU and USA, samples of cocoa beans 
are first de-husked before residue analysis takes place, 
whereas whole beans are analyzed in Japan (which is 
more likely to result in residue violations).
In Ghana, Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana and the 
Research Department of QCC evaluate pre-harvest and 
postharvest pesticides, respectively for use against 
targeted pests after which residues and tainting are 
determined.  A product is recommended to COCOBOD 
for use on cocoa when the level of residue is lower than 
or is in conformity to existing MRLs set by Codex, EU, 
USA (EPA) and Japan.
The Research Department of QCC further carries out 
monitoring of the levels of residue of the active ingre -
EMERGING ISSUES IN THE COCOA INDUSTRY 7.0
dients of pesticide being used on cocoa and offers ad -
vice on how to properly tackle violations.
  7.2   OTHER CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL RISKS FOR COCOA
Recent advances in food safety management have 
highlighted potential food safety risks associated with 
contamination of cocoa with cadmium, ochratoxin “A” 
and polycyclic-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).  The EU 
has already established maximum residue levels (MRL) 
for PAH’s in cocoa and cocoa-products.  It seems likely 
that MRL’s will be introduced for cadmium and ochra -
toxin “A”.
Heavy metals - Aside pesticides, the main potential 
food safety risks are possible contamination with cad -
mium, zinc and lead.  A cocoa tree can take up soluble 
nickel and cadmium salts and concentrate the metals 
in the cocoa beans. Therefore, the risk here would be 
due to either planting of trees in soils rich in cadmium 
or nickel salts or more likely, as a result of applying 
sub-standard inorganic fertilisers (often containing 
cadmium salts) or sewage sludge obtained from areas 
subject to industrial pollution such as ‘galamsey’ sites.  
In 2007 a defective batch of fertilizer caused high levels 
of cadmium in pineapples. In the Ghanaian context the 
most likely source of heavy metal contamination would 
come from use of cheaper non-approved inorganic 
fertilizers.  The most likely contaminant from cheap 
fertilizer is cadmium; COCOBOD therefore, insists on 
analysis of fertilizer before approval and supply to co -
coa farmers. Lead is a metal that has caused poisoning, 
and young children are particularly susceptible. Cocoa 
trees are unable to take up soluble lead salts directly 
from soil, but wet cocoa beans will absorb soluble lead 
salts if they come into contact with contaminated ma -
terial.  
The most likely routes for contamination would be dry -
ing of wet beans in contact with contaminated soil or 
via exposure to contaminated dust.  Some soils are 
naturally rich in lead salts but lead can also enter the 
environment from industrial sources and also from 
petroleum products in countries that still sell leaded 
petrol.  Fortunately, however, Ghana has phased out 
leaded petrol, so this is not an issue
 96
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
Cadmium: Cadmium can cause kidney failure and has 
been statistically associated with an increased risk of 
cancer. Cadmium is the heavy metal that is of most 
concern. The Codex Committee on Contaminants in 
Foods (CCCF) concluded in 2013 that total cadmium di -
etary exposure for high consumers of cocoa and cocoa 
products was unlikely to be of concern, but legislators 
in the EU are becoming more aware of the metal as a 
contaminant. The European Food Safety Authority Sci -
entific Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain has 
recommended that the provisional tolerable weekly 
intake (PTWI) should be 2.5 μg/kg body weight. This 
is to ensure a high level of protection of all consum -
ers, including exposed and vulnerable subgroups of the 
population. They found that chocolate products con -
tributed 4.3% of dietary exposure.
Contamination of cocoa beans with cadmium may be 
due to use of phosphate fertilizers containing unaccep -
table levels of cadmium contamination. This is a poten -
tial issue for Ghana as there is no regulatory system in 
place for testing heavy metal content of phosphate fer -
tilizers. Limited scientific evidence indicates that lev -
els in beans are not at significant levels in Ghana, but 
some of the cheaper fertilizers contained levels, which 
would raise concerns. The cadmium MRL’s do not apply 
to whole beans as parts of the whole bean (outer shell) 
are not used as food.
Ochratoxin “A” (OTA) is a toxic metabolic by-product of 
the growth of a mould,  Aspergillus ochraceus on the 
outer shell of the cocoa bean. Moist cocoa beans con -
tain sufficient moisture for the fungus to grow on the 
seed coat, but proper drying reduces moisture content 
to 5-7.5% preventing the fungus from growing. Howev -
er, the beans are highly hygroscopic and can rehydrate 
if inappropriately handled post drying or simply not 
dried properly in the first place.  If the moisture con -
tent reaches 8% or higher this represents a water ac -
tivity (available water) of between 0.75 and 0.85 in the 
outer shell of the bean, which will consequently allow 
growth of A. ochraceus and OTA formation. The fungal 
spores are likely to be present on most cocoa farms 
in Ghana, and reservoirs of infection will be provided 
through the presence of decaying waste materials such 
as discarded pod husks and rotting pods either on the 
trees or left on the ground under the trees.  Transfer 
of fungal spores to the beans is most likely to occur if 
the pods are damaged during harvesting but could also 
occur during drying if contaminated materials are left 
close to the drying mat. EU regulation EC/1881/2006 
mentions the possibility of OTA in fermented cocoa 
beans and cocoa powder but does not establish any 
maximum residue limit due to the low-level of risk to 
human health represented by these products.  This po -
sition was challenged in 2009, but the European Food 
Safety Authority (EFSA) concluded in 2010 that there 
was no scientific evidence to support changes to speci -
fications for OTA stated in EC/1881/2006 (EFSA 2010).
Polycyclic-Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) – PAH’s are a 
large group (~660 compounds) of toxic and carcinogen -
ic substances that are formed through the incomplete 
combustion of coal, oil or other fuels such as wood.  The 
most relevant compounds are a smaller group of 16 
compounds that are non-volatile, highly persistent and 
fat soluble.  The most toxic compounds are benzo(a)
pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene and 
chrysene (often grouped together as PAH4).
The most likely contamination routes for PAH’s onto 
food is via processes such as smoking, heating or dry -
ing if the combustion residues come into contact with 
the food.  In drying, contamination will occur if a direct 
heating system is used.  Indirect heating systems are 
safer but problems can occur if combustion gases leak 
into the air stream or if the exhaust gases are poorly 
ventilated.  
Other contamination routes include exposure to mo -
tor-fuel combustion products if cocoa-beans are dried 
along the edge of a road, and contamination during 
storage if beans are kept close to leaking containers of 
fuel oils.  PAH’s usually contaminate the outer shell of 
the bean but being highly fat soluble and stable, they 
will accumulate in the cocoa mass and carry through 
into final products such as chocolate if the beans are 
damaged.  There is some evidence of limited direct mi -
gration of PAH’s into the cocoa nibs.
 97
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
APPENDICES
GRANULAR FERTILISER (INOR -
GANIC)
NUTRIENT CONTENT RATE PER ACRE (50kg/BAG)
Asaasewura NPK 0-22-18+9CaO+75+MgO 3 Bags
Cocofeed NPK 0-30-20 3 Bags
Cocoa Master NPK-1-21-19+9CaO+65+6MgO+18 3 Bags
Dua Pa NPK 3-25-18-7CaO+45+6MgO+0.3(B+Zn) 3 Bags
Ferta Agra Cacao Super NPK 3-21-20+10CaO+55+5MgO+0.5(B+Zn) 3 Bags
So Aba Pa NPK 4-22-18+4CaO+45+5MgO+0.5B+0.2Zn 3 Bags
Adom Cocoa Fertiliser NPK2-23-
18+8CaO+6SO3+6MGO+0.5ZN+0.5B
3 Bags
Adehye Cocoa Fertliser NPK2-23-
18+8CaO+6SO3+6MGO+0.5ZN+0.5B
3 Bags
GRANULAR 
FERTILIZER(ORGANIC)
NUTRIENT CONTENT RATE PER ACRE (50kg/BAG)
Elite Organic Fertilizer NPK 3:4:4+9Ca+1Mg+0.04B+0.08Zn+11 
Organic matter
8 Bags
Natural Organic Cocoa Fertlizer 3%N, 2%P, 2%K + 50% Organic matter 8 Bags
LIQUID FERTILIZER NUTRIENT CONTENT DOSAGE (ml PER 11 LITRE TANK)
Sidalco NPK 6:0:20 + Trace elements (Mg, Fe, Mn, 
Cu,Zn)
30ml (300ml per acre) must be 
applied 6 times in a year 
Lithovit Urea+Carbonates of Ca and Mg+Trace 
elements
Lifet A + NPK 10:10:10 + Trace elements (Mg, Fe, 
Mn, Cu, Zn)
APPENDIX 1 - FERTILIZERS APPROVED FOR USE ON COCOA
 98
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
FUNGICIDES
Product Active ingredient(s), For-
mulation type*
Dosage (gm or ml) per 
spraying tank of 15l
No. of sachets/ 
spraying tank
Maximum interval 
between sprays 
(weeks)
Kocide 2000 DF 53.8 % Copper (II) hydrox-
ide,  (35 % copper), DF
100 gm 1 3-4
Funguran-OH 77 % Copper (II) hydroxide 
(50% copper) WP
100 gm 1 3-4
Champion 77% Copper (II) hydroxide, 
(50% Copper) WP
100 gm 1 3-4
Fungikill 50WP 15% metalaxyl + 35% Cop-
per (II) hydroxide, WP 
75 gm 1 3-4
Ridomil Gold 66 WP 6% mefenoxam +60% Cup-
per (I) oxide, WP
50 gm 1 3-4
Copper Nordox 75WG 86% Cupper (I) oxide, WP 
(75%  Copper)
75 gm 1 3-4
Metalm 72WP 12 % metalaxyl + 60 % cop-
per (1) oxide, WP
50 1 3-4 
Sidalco Defender  Dicopper chloride  trihy-
droxide, SC
 100 ml 100 ml 3-4
Agro Commet 72WP 50 gm 3-4
Fantic Benalaxyl M + copper (I) 
oxide
75 ml 75 ml 3-4 
Forum R 60 g/kg Dimethomorph + 
400 g/kg Copper hydrox-
ide
100 g 100 g 3-4
Vamos 500SC 500 g/L Fluazinam 50 ml 50 ml 3-4 
Banjo Forte 400 SC 200g/L Dimethomorph + 
200g/L Fluazinam
75 ml 75 ml 3-4
Royal Cop 50WP  50% Copper (II) hydroxide 100 g 100 g 3-4 
Delco 75WP 75 %  Cupper (I) oxide 75 g 75 g 3-4
APPENDIX 2 - FUNGICIDES APPROVED FOR USE ON COCOA
 99
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
APPENDIX 3 - INSECTICIDES APPROVED FOR USE ON COCOA
INSECTICIDE (TRADE NAME) ACTIVE INGREDIENT(S) APPLICATION RATE
Confidor OD Imidacloprid 30 ml per 11 litres of water (150 ml 
per ha)
Actara 240 SC Thiamethoxam 17 ml per 11 litres of water (85ml 
per ha)
Akate Master Bifenthrin 100 ml per 11 litres of water (500 
ml per ha
Miricon EC 900 Deltamethrin +Pyrethrum 66 ml per 11 litres of water (330ml 
per ha)
LUFU TM Thiamethoxam + Deltamethrin  54 ml per 11 litres of water (270 ml 
per ha) 
Nomax 150 SC Alpha-cypermethrin +  Teflubenzu -
ron 
52 ml per 11 litres of water (260 ml 
per ha)
Buffalo Super 4EW TM Acetaprimid 98 ml per 11 litres of water (490 ml 
per ha)
Thodan Super TM Lambda cyhalothrin  +Acetamiprid 110 ml per 11 litres of water (550 
ml per ha)
Acati Power Thiamethoxam 20 ml per 11 litres of water (100 ml 
per ha)
Insecticide A1 (formerly Capsiprid) Imidacloprid 20 ml per 11 litre of water (100 ml 
per ha)
Pridapod Imidacloprid 20 ml per 11 litres of water (100 ml 
per ha)
Callifan Super Bifenthrin + Acetamiprid 20 ml per 11 litres of water (100 ml 
per ha)
Viper Super 80 (formerly Aryna) Indoxacarb + Acetamiprid 105 ml per 11 litres of water (520 
ml per ha)
Pyrethrum 5 EW Pyrethrum 80 ml per 11 litres of water (400 ml 
per ha)
Volian Flexi Thiamethoxam + Chlorantraniliprole 20 ml per 11 litres of water (100 ml 
per ha)
Galil 300 Imidacloprid + Bifenthrin 13 ml per 11 litres of water (65 ml 
per ha) 
D Lion Akate Global 4000 Thiamethoxam 20 ml per 11 litres of water (65 ml 
per ha)
Regent 200 SC Fipronil 17 ml per 11 litres of water (85 ml 
per ha)
Acetastar Bifenthrin + Acetamiprid 120 ml per 11 litres of water (600 
ml per ha)
XDE Sulfoxaflor 120 ml per 11 litres of water (600 
ml per ha)
Trebon 30 EC Etofenprox 60 ml per 11 litres of water (300 ml 
per ha)
Akate Star 3 EC Bifenthrin 20 ml per 11 litres of water (100 ml 
per ha)
AF Confidence Capsaicin 200 ml per 11 litres of water (1000 
ml per ha)
 100
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
1 ADULTERATION
 Alteration of the composition of a parcel of cocoa 
beans by any means whatsoever
so that the resulting mixture or combination does 
not conform to the contractual
description.
2 BEAN CLUSTER
Two or more beans joined together which cannot be 
separated by finger and thumb.
3 BEAN COUNT
The total number of whole beans per 100 g derived 
from a test sample.
4 BROKEN BEAN
Cocoa bean of which a fragment is missing, the re -
maining part being more than
half of a whole bean.
5 COCOA BEAN
Raw cocoa bean, which is the whole seed of the co -
coa tree (Theobroma Cacao L.)
6. CONTAMINATION
The presence of a smoky, hammy or other smell not 
typical to cocoa, or a substance
not natural to cocoa, which is revealed during the 
Cut Test or physical inspection.
7. CUT TEST
The procedure by which the cotyledons of cocoa 
beans are exposed for the purpose
of determining the incidence of defects-  slaty, violet 
or purple and/or the presence of contamination.
8. DEFECTIVE BEAN
An internally mouldy or insect-damaged bean or 
slaty bean.
9. FAIR FERMENTED
Cocoa beans that are not more than 10% slaty and 
10% defective by count.
10. FLAT BEAN
A cocoa bean which is too thin to be cut to give a 
complete surface of the
cotyledons.
11. FOREIGN MATTER
Any substance other than cocoa beans and residue.
12. FRAGMENT
A piece of cocoa bean equal to or less than half a 
bean.
13. GERMINATED BEAN
A cocoa bean the shell of which has been pierced, 
split or broken by the growth of
the seed-germ.
14. GOOD FERMENTED
Cocoa beans that are not more than 5% slaty and 5% 
defective by count.
15. INSECT DAMAGED/INFESTED BEAN
A cocoa bean the internal parts of which are found to 
contain insects or mites at any
stage of development, or to show signs of damage 
caused thereby, which are visible to the
naked eye.
16. MOULDY BEAN
A cocoa bean on the internal parts of which mould 1 
is visible to the naked eye.
17. RESIDUE
Any cocoa element other than whole cocoa beans 
and flat beans which, does not pass
through the sieve (eg. broken beans, fragments and 
pieces of shell).
18. SIEVE
A screen with round holes the diameter of which 
shall be 5.0mm min./max.
19. SIEVINGS
The material which will pass through the Sieve.
20. SLATY BEAN
A cocoa bean which shows a slaty colour on at least 
half of the surface of the cotyledons exposed by the 
cut test.
21 Mould is not to be confused with WHITE SPOT 
which is a concentration of theobromine or cocoa 
fat.
22 VIOLET OR PURPLE BEAN
A cocoa bean which shows a violet or purple colour 
on at least half of the surface of the cotyledons ex -
posed by the cut test.
APPENDIX 4 - DEFINITIONS FOR DEFECTS 
OF COCOA BEANS
 101
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
APPENDIX 5 - SHADE TREE REGISTRATION FORM
 102
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
REFERENCES
1. A.R. Cudjoe, j.E. Sarfo, r.Adu-acheampong, e.A. Dwomoh, g.K. Awudzi, 2010; mirids/capsis on cocoa: their  
 management in ghana now and the future; entomology division, crig.
2. A.R.Cudjoe, j.E. Sarfo, r. Adu-acheampong, e.A. Dwomoh, g.K. Awudzi, 2010; emergin and minor pests of  
 cocoa: their management in ghana now and the future, entomology division, crig.S
3.  Asare, R. and David, S. (ed)( 2009). Learning about sustainable cocoa production: a guide for participatory  
 farmer training. 2. Planting/replanting cocoa and other trees. Sustainable Tree Crops Program, Interna- 
 tional Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Accra, Ghana. August 2009 version.
4.   Asare, R. and David, S. (ed)( 2009). Good agricultural practices for susutainable cocoa production: a guide  
 for farmer training. Manual  no. 1: Planting, replanting and tree diversification in cocoa systems. Sustain- 
 able Tree Crops Program, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Accra, Ghana.
5.   Azu, J. N. and Titiati, A. (2016). Sustainable and Climate Friendly Cocoa Production and Biodiversity Con- 
 servation in Cocoa Landscapes. A Trainer’s Guide.
6. Bateman, r. 2003. Rational pesticide use: spatially and temporally targeted application of specific prod- 
 ucts. In optimising pesticide use. Ed. Wilson, mf(2003) pub. Wiley.
7. Bateman, r. 2009. Pesticide use on cocoa (1st edition); a guide for training, administrative and research  
 staff, rpb, iparc.
8.  Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana, 2010. Cocoa Manual. A Source Book For Sustainable Cocoa Production.
9. Crop life international: http//www.Croplife.Org/( assessed on march 10th 2010).
10. Dunn, j.A. 1963. Insecticide resisitance in cocoa caspid, distantiella theobroma (dist.), Nature, (lond), 199: 1207.
11.  Decrees and legislations on quality control company limited of the ghana cocoa board. N.C.L.D. Nos. 278  
 And l. I. Nos 598, 643, 644, 654, 646 and &13.
12. Entwistle, pf, johnson, c.G., Dunn, e. 1959. Nature (lond) 184: 2040.
13.  G.K. Awudzi, a.R. Cudjoe, m.K. Assuah, r. Adu-acheampong, e.A.Dwomoh, patricia adu-yeboah & j.E. Safo,2012.  
 Pesticide use in cocoa cultivation in ghana, technical bulletin no. 23.
14. International pesticide application research center (iparc): http://www.Dropdata.Org;http://www.Drop- 
 data.Org/cocoa_prob.Htm. (Assessed on march 10th 2010.
15.  International Cocoa Initiative (2015). Eliminating the Worst Forms of Child Labour- Trainers Manual.
16.  Matthews, g.A. 2006. Pesticides: health, safety and the environment. Blackwell publishing ltd., Oxford, 235 pp.
17. Owusu-manu, e. 1974. The effects of insecticides used in te control of cocoa mirids on non-target organisms. In:  
 proceedings of the 4th west african cocoa entomologist conference, 1974, legon, accra, ghana. Pp.3-10
18. Owusu-manu, e. 1999. The effect of insecticide spray on the soil fauna of cocoa farms in ghana. In. Pro- 
 ceedings, 12th international cocoa research conference, salvador, bahia, brazil, 1996. Pp.13-17.
19. Peter, m.B. 2005. Pesticide applicator’s handbook. Plant protection and regulatory directorate, ministry  
 of food and agriculture ghana.
20.  Quality control division (ghana cocoa board) general procedures and instructions.
21.  Rainforest Alliance. Sustainable and climate friendly cocoa production and biodiversity conservation in  
 cocoa landscapes-  A trainer’s guide. 
22.  Wood, G.A.R. and Lass, R.A. (????). Cocoa (??Edition).
 103
 Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana
 104
Manual for Cocoa Extension in Ghana