# Save and Grow: Cassava — A Guide to Sustainable Production Intensification
# publisher: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
# year: 2013
# url: https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/f1394968-5048-433c-8509-2ff0d8864bf0/content
# attribution: FAO, Save and Grow: Cassava (2013)
# ghana_specific: False
# extent: 142 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

SAVE AND GROW: CASSAVAFAO
/T_his guide is the /f_irst on the 
practical application of FAO’s 
“Save and Grow” model of 
agriculture to speci/f_ic 
smallholder crops and farming 
systems. It comes as cassava 
production intensi/f_ies 
worldwide, and growers shift 
from traditional cultivation 
practices to monocropping, 
higher-yielding genotypes, and 
greater use of agrochemicals. 
Intensi/f_ication carries great risks, including soil nutrient 
depletion and upsurges in pests and diseases. /T_he guide shows 
how ecosystem-based “Save and Grow” approaches and practices 
can help tropical developing countries to avoid the risks of 
unsustainable intensi/f_ication, while realizing cassava’s potential 
for producing higher yields, alleviating hunger and rural poverty, 
and contributing to national economic development.
SAVE AND GROW
A GUIDE TO SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION INTENSIFICATION
C
M
Y
CM
MY
CY
CMY
K
copertina cassava save and grow.pdf   1   25aprile2013   12.00

Save and Grow:
Cassava
A guide to sustainable production intensification
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION 
OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Rome, 2013
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information 
product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the 
legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, 
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of 
specific companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been 
patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by FAO in 
preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
ISBN 978-92-5-107641-5 (print) 
E-ISBN 978-92-5-107642-2 (PDF)
© FAO 2013
FAO encourages the use, reproduction and dissemination of material in this 
information product. Except where otherwise indicated, material may be copied, 
downloaded and printed for private study, research and teaching purposes, 
or for use in non-commercial products or services, provided that appropriate 
acknowledgement of FAO as the source and copyright holder is given and that FAO’s 
endorsement of users’ views, products or services is not implied in any way. 
All requests for translation and adaptation rights, and for resale and other 
commercial use rights should be made via www.fao.org/contact-us/licencerequest 
or addressed to copyright@fao.org. FAO information products are available on 
the FAO website (www.fao.org/publications) and can be purchased through 
publications-sales@fao.org
Foreword 
C
assava is a tropical root crop, originally from Amazonia, that 
provides the staple food of an estimated 800 mi
llion people world-
wide. Grown almost exclusively by low-income, smallholder farmers, 
it i
s one of the few staple crops that can be produced efficiently on a 
small scale, without the need for mechanization or purchased inputs, 
and in marginal areas with poor soils and unpredictable rainfall. 
Since 2000, the world’s annual cassava production has increased by 
an estimated 100 mi
llion tonnes, driven in Asia by demand for dried 
cassava and starch for use in livestock feed and industrial applications, 
and in Africa by expanding urban markets for cassava food products. 
There is great potential for further production increases – under 
optimal conditions, cassava yields can reach 80  to
nnes per hectare, 
compared to the current world average yield of just 12.8 t
onnes. 
Booming demand offers millions of cassava growers in tropical 
countries the opportunity to intensify production, earn higher 
incomes and boost the food supply where it is most needed. But how 
smallholder cassava growers choose to improve productivity should 
be of major concern to policymakers. The Green Revolution in cereal 
production, based on genetically uniform varieties and intensive use 
of irrigation and agrochemicals, has taken a heavy toll on agriculture’s 
natural resource base, jeopardizing future productivity. In moving 
from traditional, low-input to more intensive cultivation, small-scale 
cassava growers should not make the same mistakes.
Sustainable intensification of cassava production is the subject of 
this guide, the first in a series to the practical application of FAO’s 
“Save and Grow” model of agriculture to specific smallholder crops 
and farming systems. Endorsed by FAO in 2010, “Save and Grow” is an 
ecosystem approach to agriculture that aims at improving productivity 
while conserving natural resources. It promotes practices that can 
help the world’s half a billion smallholder farm families to produce 
more from the same area of land while enhancing natural capital and 
ecosystem services.
Drawing on two decades of research findings and on-farm experi-
ences in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, the guide 
pres
ents an eco-friendly approach to managing cassava more inten-
sively. Many recommended practices combine traditional knowledge 
wi
th modern technologies that are adapted to the needs of small-scale 
iv  Save and Grow: Cassava
producers. They include: minimizing tillage to protect soil health, 
optimizing timing and methods of planting, and using biological 
control agents to counter pests and diseases. The guide shows how 
well-balanced applications of mineral fertilizer, in combination with 
intercropping, crop rotation, mulching, manure and compost, can 
make a cassava-based farming system not only more productive and 
profitable, but also more sustainable. 
The adoption of “Save and Grow” agriculture will require significant 
improvements in the provision of extension, inputs and production 
credit to small-scale producers. Moreover, FAO recognizes that 
improved productivity may not bring about sustainable, long-term 
development outcomes: a major effort is needed to integrate smallhold-
ers into higher levels of value addition. Transforming cassava into a 
mu
ltipurpose subsector that generates income, diversifies economies 
and ensures food for all will require political commitment, investment, 
institutional support and a demand-driven approach to technology 
development. 
This guide will be a valuable resource for policymakers in assessing 
how a dynamic cassava sector can help them to achieve their goals of 
poverty alleviation, economic development and food security, and of 
practical use to agricultural researchers, technicians and other profes-
sionals in preparing programmes for sustainable cassava production 
in
tensification.
Clayton Campanhola
Director, FAO Plant Production and Protection Division
Contents
Foreword iii
Acknowledgements vi
Overview vii
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 1
Chapter 2: Farming systems 19
Chapter 3: Varieties and planting material 35
Chapter 4: Water management 49
Chapter 5: Crop nutrition 59
Chapter 6: Pests and diseases 73
Chapter 7: Harvest, post-harvest and value addition 87
Chapter 8: The way forward 97
Annex tables 109
References 121
Abbreviations 129
vi  Save and Grow: Cassava
Authors
This guide was prepared by 
Reinhardt Howeler
CIAT emeritus scientist 
NeBambi Lutaladio  
and Graeme Thomas
of the FAO Plant Production  
and Protection Division
Acknowledgements
The contributions of the following are 
gratefully acknowledged: 
Kolawole Adebayo (Abeokuta University 
of Agriculture, Nigeria)
Jean Pierre Anota (FAO consultant)
Tin Maung Aye (CIAT)
Jan Breithaupt (FAO)
Hernán Ceballos (CIAT)
Swarup K. Chakrabarti (CTCRI, India)
Mark Davis (FAO)
Dominique Dufour (CIAT)
Emerson Fey (State University of West 
Paraná, Brazil)
Marjon Fredrix (FAO)
Theodor Friedrich (FAO)
Gualbert Gbehounou (FAO)
Winfred Hammond (FAO)
Lawan Jeerapong (Department  
of Agricultural Extension, Thailand)
Jippe Hoogeveen (FAO)
Josef Kienzle (FAO)
Lava Kumar (IITA)
Chikelu Mba (FAO)
Danilo Mejía (FAO)
Linn Borgen Nilsen (FAO)
Christian Nolte (FAO)
Bernardo Ospina Patiño (CLAYUCA)
Dai Peters (Great Lakes Cassava 
Initiative)
Adam Prakash (FAO)
Chareinsak Rojanaridpiched (Kasetsart
 
University, Thailand)
Teresa Sánchez (CIAT)
Brian Sims (FAO consultant)
Mario Takahashi (Agricultural Institute 
of Paraná, Brazil)
Namthip Thongnak (Thai Tapioca 
Development Institute)
Bernard Vanlauwe (IITA)
Andrew Westby (University  
of Greenwich, UK)
James Whyte (FAO consultant)
Amporn Winotai (Department  
of Agriculture, Thailand)
Book design  
Thomas+Sansonetti
Cover and illustrations
Cecilia Sanchez
Editorial assistance
Diana Gutiérrez
Overview
1. Cassava, a 21st century crop
The “food of the poor” has become a multipurpose crop that 
responds to the priorities of developing countries, to trends in 
the global economy and to the challenge of climate change.
L
ong regarded as unsuitable for intensification, cassava has 
grown dramatically in importance in world agriculture. The 
2012 harvest reached record levels, thanks to expansion of global 
trade in cassava products and strong growth of output in Africa. 
Production is intensifying worldwide. In the years ahead, cassava 
will see a shift to monocropping, higher-yielding genotypes, and 
greater use of irrigation and agrochemicals. But intensification 
carries great risks, including upsurges in pests and diseases, and 
depletion of soil nutrients. This guide shows how FAO’s “Save and 
Grow” farming approach can help developing countries to avoid 
the risks of unsustainable intensification, while realizing cassava’s 
potential for producing higher yields, alleviating rural poverty and 
contributing to national economic development.
2. Farming systems
Many smallholder cassava growers already practise three 
key “Save and Grow” recommendations: reduced or zero 
tillage, soil surface cover and crop diversification.
P
lanting cassava without prior tillage in degraded soils may 
produce lower yields in the initial years; once soil health is 
restored, however, untilled land can produce high yields at a 
lower cost to the farmer and the farm’s natural resources. Mulch 
and cover crops help to reduce weed infestations and create 
soil conditions that improve productivity. Growing cassava in 
associations, sequences and rotations increases net income per 
unit area of land, and reduces the risk of crop failure. Intercropping 
with grain legumes can produce higher incomes than 
monocropping, and supplies food for the household. Protective 
hedgerows reduce soil erosion, while rotating cassava with legumes 
and cereals helps to restore soil health and yields.
viii  Save and Grow: Cassava
3. Varieties and planting material
The full potential of cassava will not be realized until 
production constraints are mitigated in higher-yielding 
varieties, and cassava growers have access to disease-free 
planting material.
T
he time is right for the genome-wide characterization of 
cassava genetic diversity, to fill gaps in landrace collections, 
and to create natural reserves to safeguard wild relatives. The 
harmonization of passport and evaluation data on genebank 
accessions should be a priority. Breeding should focus on 
developing varieties that are well-adapted to specific agro-
ecologies, cropping systems and end-uses, and produce good yields 
with minimal need for agrochemicals and irrigation. The routine 
multiplication and distribution of disease-free planting material 
of improved varieties are essential for sustainable intensification. 
While few countries have formal seed systems for cassava, a 3-tier 
community-based system pioneered in Africa, involving NGOs 
and farmer associations, has helped ensure that improved varieties 
and healthy planting material are adopted by cassava growers. 
4. Water management
Once established, cassava can grow in areas that receive 
just 400 mm of average annual rainfall. But much higher 
yields can be obtained with higher levels of water supply.
O
ptimizing rainfed cassava production requires careful 
attention to planting dates, planting methods and planting 
positions, and soil management practices that help to conserve 
water. Although it can grow in areas with 400 mm of rainfall 
a year, maximum root yields in Thailand were correlated with 
rainfall totalling about 1 700 mm. Cassava responds well to 
irrigation – full surface irrigation has doubled the root yield 
obtained without irrigation; drip irrigation can produce about 
the same yield as surface irrigation using 50 percent less water. In 
Nigeria, root yields increased sixfold when the quantity of water 
supplied by supplementary drip irrigation was equal to that of the 
season’s rainfall. Supplemental irrigation that increased the total 
water supply by 20 percent almost doubled root yields.
Overview ix
5. Crop nutrition
Combining ecosystem processes and judicious use of mineral 
fertilizer forms the basis of a sustainable crop nutrition 
system that produces more while using fewer external inputs.
A
lthough cassava produces reasonable yields on poor soils, 
many varieties perform better with fertilization. Yields in 
Africa, especially, could be markedly improved if farmers had 
access to mineral fertilizer at a reasonable price. Farmers can 
improve soil fertility with other “Save and Grow” measures. 
Intercropping grain legumes, and mulching the residues of 
legumes and native weeds, boosts root yields. When combined 
with fertilizer, both alley cropping with deep-rooting leguminous 
trees and the use of organic compost or farmyard manure produce 
higher crop yields and net incomes. Options to reduce the loss of 
soil nutrients to erosion include zero tillage, which maintains soil 
aggregate stability and internal drainage, contour hedgerows of 
vetiver grass, and the application of mineral fertilizer, which leads 
to faster soil coverage by the plant canopy. 
6. Pests and diseases
Protecting cassava with pesticide is usually ineffective and 
hardly ever economic. A range of non-chemical measures can 
help farmers reduce losses while protecting the agro-ecosystem.
G
rowers should use planting material of varieties with 
tolerance or resistance to major pests and diseases, as well 
as ecosystem-based practices, such as mulching, maintaining soil 
organic matter, and planting intercrops to provide a habitat for 
pest predators. Biopesticides, sticky traps and soapy water can help 
control many insect pests. Plant health strategies should encourage 
natural biological agents – the mass release of a tiny wasp defeated 
serious outbreaks of cassava mealybug in Africa and Asia. To 
prevent weeds overwhelming young plants, farmers should use 
optimum planting densities and fertilization, and varieties with 
vigorous early growth. Regular hand weeding can be as effective as 
weed control with herbicides. Farmers need to exercise care in the 
choice of the herbicides and should follow the advice of local plant 
protection specialists.
x  Save and Grow: Cassava
7. Harvest, post-harvest and value addition
Food for the household, feed for livestock, and raw material 
for a wide array of value-added products, from coarse flour to 
high-tech starch gels – cassava is a truly multipurpose crop. 
H
arvested cassava roots are consumed directly by many farm 
households or fed to their livestock. Roots can be processed 
into granulated flour, or into high quality cassava flour which can 
be used as a substitute for some of the wheat flour in bread and 
confectionary. In Thailand and China, root starch goes into food 
products, plywood, paper and textiles, and is used as feedstock for 
production of sweeteners, fructose, alcohol and fuel ethanol. Two 
recent cassava mutations have starch properties that are highly 
valued by industry. The root is not the only useful part of the plant 
– young cassava leaves make a nutritious vegetable, and plant tops 
can be fed to cattle, buffaloes, pigs, chickens and silkworms.
8. The way forward
Governments need to encourage smallholders’ participation 
in a sustainable cassava development agenda, and support 
research and extension approaches that “let farmers decide”.
F
armer participatory research and farmer field schools have 
proven very effective in promoting sustainable natural 
resources management in smallholder production systems. 
Cassava growers may also require incentives, such as payments 
for environmental services, to adopt improved farming practices. 
Action is needed to make mineral fertilizer and other inputs more 
affordable to smallholders, and to provide them with quality, 
disease-free planting material. Investment in roads, storage and 
processing capacity in production zones will help cassava growers 
retain a bigger share of value-addition. Policies should promote 
private investment in cassava processing, and foster associations 
that link producers with processors, promote standards and 
share market information. While government subsidies may 
reduce farmers’ exposure to price volatility, more sustainable 
options are available, such as crop insurance and supply contracts 
between food manufacturers and farmers’ cooperatives.
Chapter 1
Cassava,  
a 21st century crop
The “food of the poor” has become  
a multipurpose crop that responds  
to the priorities of developing countries,  
to trends in the global economy,  
and to the challenge of climate change.

Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 3
C
assava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is one of some 100 sp ecies 
of trees, shrubs and herbs of the genus Manihot, which is 
distributed from northern Argentina to the southern United 
States of America. While some studies indicate that cassava 
has multiple centres of origin, others suggest that the cultivated 
species originated on the southern edge of the Brazilian Amazon
1-4. 
Botanically, cassava is a woody perennial shrub, which grows from 
1
 m to 5 m in h
eight. It is believed to have been cultivated, mainly for 
its starchy roots, for 9 00
0 years, making it one of agriculture’s oldest 
crops. In pre-Colombian times, it was grown in many parts of South 
America, Mesoamerica and the Caribbean islands. 
Following the Spanish and Portuguese conquests, cassava was taken 
from Brazil to the Atlantic coast of Africa. By the 1800s it was being 
grown along Africa’s east coast and in Southern Asia. Farming of 
cassava expanded considerably in the 20th
 ce
ntury, when it emerged 
as an important food crop across sub-Saharan Africa and in India, 
Indonesia and the Philippines. 
Since it is sensitive to frost and 
has a growing season of nearly 
one year, cassava is cultivated 
almost exclusively in tropical and 
subtropical regions. It is grown 
today by millions of small-scale 
farmers in more than 100
 co
un-
tries, from American Samoa to 
Za
mbia, under a variety of local 
names: mandioca in Brazil, yuca 
in Honduras, ketela pohon in 
Indonesia, mihogo in Kenya, akpu 
in Nigeria and sắn in Viet Nam.
Manihot esculenta has characteristics that make it highly attractive 
to smallholder farmers in isolated areas where soils are poor and rain-
fall is low or unpredictable. Since it is propagated from stem cuttings, 
pl
anting material is low-cost and readily available. The plant is highly 
tolerant to acid soils, and has formed a symbiotic association with soil 
fungi that help its roots absorb phosphorus and micronutrients. To 
discourage herbivores, its leaves produce two glycosides which, when 
digested, produce highly toxic hydrogen cyanide. Since most of the soil 
nutrients absorbed during growth remain in the above-ground part 
Studies suggest that 
cassava was first 
cultivated, as many as 
9 000 years ago, on the 
southern edge of the 
Brazilian Amazon, where 
it is still grown today
4  Save and Grow: Cassava
of the plant, recycling the plant tops helps to maintain soil fertility. 
Under drought stress, leaf production is reduced until the next rains. 
Thanks to its efficient use of water and soil nutrients, and tolerance 
to sporadic pest attacks, cassava growers, using few if any inputs, can 
expect reasonable harvests where other crops would fail.
Cassava roots are more than 60
 pe
rcent water. However, their dry 
matter is very rich in carbohydrates, amounting to about 250 to 300 kg
 
for every tonne of fresh roots. When the root is used as food, the best 
time to harvest is at about 8 to 10
 mo
nths after planting; a longer 
growing period generally produces a higher starch yield. However, 
harvesting of some varieties can be “as needed”, at any time between 
six months and two years. Those attributes have made cassava one 
of the world’s most reliable food security crops.
Thanks to its roots’ high starch content, cassava is a rich source 
of dietary energy. Its energy yield per hectare is often very high, and 
potentially much higher than that of cereals
5. In many countries of 
sub-Saharan Africa, it is the cheapest source of calories available. In 
addition, the roots contain significant amounts of vitamin C, thiamine, 
riboflavin and niacin
6.
Depending on the variety, they may also contain high levels of 
cyanogenic glycosides, especially in the outer layers7. Once harvested, 
therefore, cassava roots are peeled, then thoroughly cooked, or peeled, 
grated and soaked to induce fermentation in order to release the 
volatile cyanide gas. The mash is processed further – by drying, 
roasting or boiling – into coarse flour and other food products. In 
some countries, cassava is also grown for its leaves, which 
contain up to 25
 pe
rcent protein, on a dry weight basis5, 8. 
Sun-drying or cooking reduces the hydrogen cyanide 
to safe levels. Both leaves and roots can be fed to 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 5
Cassava grows from 
stakes cut from the 
plant’s stems. After 
3 months, some of its 
fibrous roots begin 
to swell with starch 
relocated from the leaves.  
Most of the root starch 
forms after the sixth 
month, when the plant 
also achieves maximum 
canopy size
farm animals, while stems can be used as firewood and a substrate 
for growing mushrooms.
Cassava’s versatility does not end there. Its root starch can also 
be used in a wide array of industries, including food manufacturing, 
pharmaceuticals, textiles, plywood, paper and adhesives, and as 
feedstock for the production of ethanol biofuel.
6  Save and Grow: Cassava
240
220
200
180
80
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2011
120
100
160
140
Source: FAO. 2013. FAOSTAT statistical database (http://faostat.fao.org/).
Maize
Cassava
Rice
Wheat
Potatoes
Figure 1 Growth in world production of major crops, 1980-2011 (index 1980=100)
Among the family of staple food crops, cassava was long regarded as 
the least suited to intensification. Cassava stem cuttings are bulky and 
can easily transmit serious pests and diseases, and the plant’s very low 
rate of vegetative multiplication retards the adoption of new, improved 
varieties. Unearthing cassava roots is labour-intensive, and the roots 
themselves are cumbersome to transport and highly perishable: they 
need to be processed within a few days of harvesting.
The Green Revolution approach to intensification, based on dwarf 
varieties and high inputs of agrochemicals and irrigation, dramatically 
boosted yields of wheat and rice, but it has proven inappropriate for 
cassava in rainfed areas. Partly because it is grown in developing 
countries, far less research and development has been devoted to 
cassava than to rice, maize and wheat
9.
But cassava’s importance in agriculture has changed dramatically. 
Between 1980 and 2011, the global harvested area of cassava expanded 
by 44
 pe
rcent, from 13.6 mi
llion to 19.6 mi
llion hectares, which was the 
biggest percentage increase among the world’s five major food crops. 
In that same period, world cassava production more than doubled, 
from 124
 m
illion to 252 m
illion tonnes10. 
Over the past decade, growth in cassava production has accelerated 
(Figure 1). FAO estimates put the global harvest in 2012 at more than 
280
 mi
llion tonnes, representing a 60 pe
rcent increase since 2000 and 
an annual growth rate double that of the previous two decades11. Since 
2000, the growth rate of cassava output in Africa has been equal to 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 7
/zero.oldstyle >/zero.oldstyle-/zero.oldstyle./zero.oldstyle/one.oldstyle/nine.oldstyle>/zero.oldstyle./zero.oldstyle/one.oldstyle/nine.oldstyle-/zero.oldstyle./one.oldstyle/nine.oldstyle/four.oldstyle>/zero.oldstyle./one.oldstyle/nine.oldstyle/four.oldstyle-/one.oldstyle./nine.oldstyle/three.oldstyle/five.oldstyle>/one.oldstyle./nine.oldstyle/three.oldstyle/five.oldstyle
Equator
Tropic of Cancer
Tropic of Capricorn
that of maize, while in South, Southeast and Eastern Asia the rate has 
been almost three times that of rice10. 
Another significant trend since the turn of the century is the 
higher productivity of cassava-based farming systems. Growth in 
production between 1980 and 2000 was due mainly to increases in 
the harvested area, of some 3.7
 mi
llion ha; yields grew at an annual 
rate of just 0.6 pe
rcent. Since then, global average yields per hectare 
have increased by almost 1.8 pe
rcent a year, from 10.4 tonnes per ha 
in 2000 to 12.8 tonnes in 2011. While growth of cassava yields trailed 
well behind that of other major food crops in the period 1980-2000, 
the rate of increase over the past decade has exceeded that of potatoes, 
maize, rice and wheat
10. 
Current average yields are still far lower than cassava’s potential. A 
study by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) in 
the 1990s estimated conservatively that – with improved crop and soil 
management, and the use of higher yielding varieties more resistant 
to drought, pests and diseases – cassava could produce an average 
of 23.2
 to
nnes of roots per ha. On the current harvested area, that 
amounts to more than 450 m
illion tonnes a year.
A review of developments in the world’s cassava producing regions 
reveals that diverse factors are driving increases in output and that 
growers are responding to rising demand by intensifying production.
Source: Adapted from Monfreda, C., 
Ramankutty, N. & Foley, J.A. 2008. 
Farming the planet: 2. Geographic 
distribution of crop areas, yields, 
physiological types, and net primary 
production in the year 2000. Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 22: 1-19.
Global cassava harvested area (ha/km 2)
8  Save and Grow: Cassava
Production
Area
Yield
300
280
260
240
80
1980
1989
1986
1983
1992
1995
1998
2004
2001
2010
2007
180
160
140
120
100
220
200
Source: Annex Tables 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3
Figure 2 Growth in cassava production, harvested area and yield in sub-Saharan Africa,  
1980-2011 Index: 1980=100
Production
Area
Yield
80
1980
1989
1986
1983
1992
1995
1998
2004
2001
2010
2007
180
160
140
120
100
200
Source: Annex Tables 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3
Figure 3 Growth in cassava production, harvested area and yield in Asia, 1980-2011  
Index: 1980=100
Production
Area
Yield
80
1980
1989
1986
1983
1992
1995
1998
2004
2001
2010
2007
180
160
140
120
100
200
Source: Annex Tables 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3
Figure 4 Growth in cassava production, harvested area and yield in Latin America  
and the Caribbean, 1980-2011 Index: 1980=100
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 9
Sub-Saharan Africa
Output of cassava has increased most markedly in sub-Saharan Africa, 
which harvested 140.9 mi
llion tonnes – more than half of the global 
harvest – in 2011. Between 1980 and 2000, production almost doubled, 
from 48.3
 mi
llion to 95.3 mi
llion tonnes, thanks to a 56  pe
rcent in-
crease in the harvested area and 25 pe rcent growth in yields. Between 
2000 to 2011, expansion of the harvested area slowed to 18 pe
rcent, 
but improvements in yields, from 8.6 tonnes to 10.8  to
nnes per ha, 
boosted production by almost 50 p
ercent (Figure 2). 
Cassava in sub-Saharan Africa is grown mainly on small holdings 
by low-income farmers who make little or no use of external inputs. 
It is usually grown with other crops, such as maize, rice, legumes, 
melons, bananas and oil palm. It is still essentially a food crop – around 
90
 pe
rcent of harvested roots are destined for human consumption, 
while around 10 pe
rcent is semi-processed as on-farm animal feed12. 
Since 2000, cassava production has grown faster than the region’s 
population, boosting the cassava food supply to almost 60 kg per 
capita per year. Africans’ consumption of cassava is higher than that 
of any other staple food, including maize. Almost all of it is consumed 
as fresh roots or after processing into fermented flour products
13. 
By some estimates, urban Nigerians consume cassava at the rate of 
0.2
 k
g per day14.
The biggest gains in cassava production since 2000 have been 
in West Africa, where output rose by 60  pe
rcent, from 47  mi
llion 
to 76 mi
llion tonnes. Productivity has increased as countries in the 
subregion recognized cassava’s potential as an industrial crop that 
could help to diversify farmers’ incomes, earn foreign exchange and 
generate jobs
12. Growth in output was particularly strong in Nigeria 
and Ghana: in the space of 11 years, both countries boosted yields by 
25
 p
ercent, to around 15 tonnes per ha10. 
Average yields in the rest of the region remain low, at around 
10 to
nnes. However, thanks to more intensive production – mainly 
through greater use of improved varieties, mineral fertilizer and 
other inputs – yields have increased substantially in some countries. 
For example, a government programme in Malawi for the rapid 
multiplication of disease-free, higher-yielding planting material led 
to a rapid increase in cassava cultivation nationwide
15. Between 1990 
and 2011, average yields rose from 2.3 tonnes per ha to 21.5 tonnes, 
and production from 144
 0
00 to 4.2 m
illion tonnes10.
10  Save and Grow: Cassava
More recently, Rwanda has shown how intensification can produce 
spectacular results in a very short time. Since 2007, the country’s food 
crop intensification programme has distributed to farmers 140 mi
llion 
stem cuttings of improved, disease-resistant varieties, and provided 
them with imported fertilizer and extension advice. As a result, yields 
rose from less than 6.5 tonnes in 2007 to 12.3 tonnes by 2011, and 
production more than tripled, from 780
 0
00 to 2.5 m
illion tonnes16.
Sub-Saharan Africa lags behind global trends in the development of 
the cassava value chain. However, new uses for cassava are emerging: 
in commercial livestock feed, as a partial substitute for wheat flour in 
bread making and as an industrial raw material. In 2012, Nigeria made 
a strong entry into the global cassava trade when it secured an order 
to supply China with 1
 mi
llion tonnes of dried cassava chips 10; the 
government recently announced further sales to China of 3.3 mi
llion 
tonnes in 201317. 
Asia
Cassava growers in Asia account for 30 pe rcent of world production. 
Over the past three decades, their cassava output has grown by 
66
 pe
rcent, from 45.9 mi
llion tonnes in 1980 to 76.6 mi
llion tonnes in 
2011. That growth was due almost entirely to more intensive cultiva-
tion – the harvested area in 1980 and 2011 was unchanged, at around 
3.
9 mi
llion ha, while average yields increased from 11.8 to 19.5 tonnes 
per ha in the same period (Figure 3). 
As in Africa, cassava is mainly a smallholder crop that was once 
grown as a reserve in case of shortfalls in the rice harvest and as 
on-farm animal feed
18. Today, most cassava is grown in the region 
to meet demand for dried cassava chips and cassava starch for use in 
commercial livestock feed and for industrial processing. 
Thailand put cassava on the map of industrial uses in the 1980s, 
when it developed a thriving business exporting dried pellets to Europe 
for use in livestock feed. The country’s impressive increase in cassava 
production, from 3.4
 mi
llion tonnes in 1970 to more than 20 mi
llion 
tonnes in 1990, was achieved thanks to expansion of the harvested 
area, which grew almost seven times over; yields actually fell, from 
15.3 tonnes to less than 14 tonnes per ha
10. 
In the 1990s, Thailand launched a major programme for the dis -
semination to farmers of new, higher-yielding varieties, along with 
im
proved access to mineral fertilizer and extension. Between 1990 and 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 11
2009, Thai yields rose by almost two-thirds, the harvested area shrank 
by 10 p
ercent, and production reached a record 30 m
illion tonnes. 
Since 2000, Asia’s cassava production has increased by 55 pe
rcent, 
as more countries seek to enter lucrative export markets. The region’s 
major customer is China. Between 2000 and 2009, China’s annual 
imports of dried cassava grew from 256  000 tonnes to more than 
6
 mi
llion tonnes, while imports of cassava starch more than doubled, 
to 1.2 m
illion tonnes10. 
Thailand dominates the export trade, shipping 6 mi
llion tonnes of 
dried cassava chips and starch, with a total value of US$1.5 billion, in 
2010. However, it faces increasing competition. Viet Nam has more 
than quadrupled cassava production, from 2
 mi
llion to 8.5  mi
llion 
tonnes11 since 2000, and exported 1 mi llion tonnes of dried cassava 
in 2010. Indonesian exports also grew, from 150 000 tonnes in 2000 
to 1.4
 mi
llion tonnes. In Cambodia, a fledgling export trade in dried 
cassava, amounting to 22 000 tonnes in 2011, was recently boosted 
by orders from China for 1
 m
illion tonnes19. 
An important new area of cassava utilization in Asia is as feedstock 
for the production of biofuel – one tonne of dried chips yields about 
300 litres of 96
 pe
rcent pure ethanol13. As countries seek to reduce 
both dependence on imported oil and greenhouse gas emissions, 
companies in China, Japan and the Republic of Korea are obtaining 
concessions for large-scale cassava plantations, mainly in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Lao PDR and the Philippines, as a source of dried chips for 
ethanol production. 
In a few countries, cassava remains first and foremost a food crop. 
Indonesia has the region’s highest per capita cassava food supply, of 
44 kg per year, well above the regional average of 6.7 kg. Cassava is 
also grown mainly for food in Kerala State, India, where farmers have 
achieved average root yields of 24 tonnes per ha, thanks to intensive 
production, often under irrigation
20. 
Latin America and the Caribbean
Only 14 percent of the world’s cassava, or some 34.3 mi llion tonnes, is 
grown in Latin America and the Caribbean, where Manihot esculenta 
was domesticated. Between 1980 and 2011, the harvested area grew by 
less than 1
 pe
rcent, to 2.6 mi
llion ha, while production increased by 
15 pe
rcent, thanks to modest improvements in yields. Nevertheless, 
average annual growth in production since 2000 has been at twice 
the rate recorded in the previous two decades (Figure 4).
12  Save and Grow: Cassava
As in other tropical regions, cassava in the Americas is usually 
relegated to marginal areas with uncertain rainfall, acid soils, low 
native soil fertility, and difficult terrain. The inherent nature of cassava 
cultivation, especially the labour inputs required, makes it generally a 
smallholder crop, grown in farming systems that include other crops 
or animal components
21. Production is dominated by Brazil, which 
harvested 24.4 mi
llion tonnes – almost three-quarters of the region’s 
total output – in 2011, followed by Paraguay (2.4  mi
llion tonnes), 
Colombia (2.2 m
illion tonnes) and Peru (1.1 m
illion tonnes)10. 
Although consumption of cassava as food has declined over the past 
50 years, with the massive movement of rural populations to urban 
areas, it remains an important staple food especially in Colombia and 
northeast Brazil. FAO estimates that, regionally, about half of cassava 
production is used as food and half as animal feed. Cassava consump-
tion is being promoted in Brazil by policies aimed at substituting 
im
ported cereals with domestically produced cassava flour. The 
government has mandated the blending of 10 pe
rcent cassava flour 
with wheat flour in bread, an initiative that is estimated to absorb 
about half of the country’s cassava output
11.
Cassava growers in Latin America and the Caribbean typically 
apply few inputs, and yields – averaging 12.9 tonnes per ha – are well 
below potential levels. However, there has been a significant shift, 
beginning in the 1990s, toward larger-scale, more intensive production, 
especially in Brazil. While most of Brazil’s cassava continues to be 
grown in the dry northeast, where yields average around 11 tonnes per 
ha
21, intensive cultivation in the country’s southern states – mainly to 
produce cassava flour and native starch for the food, cardboard and 
textile industries – has obtained yields of up to 40 tonnes
22. 
Brazilian production of cassava starch, processed mainly in factories 
in the state of Paraná, is estimated at more than 500 000 tonnes in 
2011
23. Some 70 percent of the raw material is produced by smallholder 
f
armers24. To ensure a year-round supply of raw material, cassava 
production is mechanized, with farmers frequently cultivating cassava 
as a monocrop using high levels of inputs
24. Other countries in the 
region, notably Colombia, Paraguay and Venezuela, are also increasing 
their capacity to produce cassava starch. Compared to Asia, very little 
of the region’s cassava output enters international trade. In fact, the 
biggest exporter is Costa Rica, which exported some 92 000 tonnes 
of dried cassava in 2010. 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 13
Although world cassava production reached record levels in 2012, 
for the 14th consecutive year, there remains ample room for further 
growth. World trade in cassava products saw a marked expansion in 
2012, thanks to cassava’s price advantage over maize as a source of 
starch. International prices of chips and starch have been remarkably 
stable, despite very strong demand. FAO expects continued increases 
in production in 2013 in sub-Saharan Africa
11.
Cassava’s new status in agriculture is a major step forward toward 
realization of Global Cassava Development Strategy, adopted in 2001, 
after four years of consultations, by FAO, the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD), public and private sector partners 
and 22 cassava-producing countries. The strategy recognized cassava’s 
potential not only to meet food security needs, but also to provide an 
engine for rural industrial development and a source of higher incomes 
for producers, processors and traders
25. 
If anything, growth in cassava production is likely to accelerate 
over the current decade. Once seen as the “food of the poor”, cassava 
has emerged as a multipurpose crop for the 21
st century – one that 
responds to the priorities of developing countries, to trends in the 
global economy and to the challenges of climate change. In brief:
Rural development. Policymakers in tropical countries are recogniz-
ing the huge potential of cassava to spur rural industrial development 
an
d raise rural incomes. They look to Thailand, where increases in 
yields over the past two decades have boosted smallholder earnings 
by an estimated US$650
 mi
llion and lifted many cassava growers 
out of poverty. In southern Brazil, cassava is a multi-million dollar 
industrial crop, processed in factories that employ thousands of rural 
people
24. It has been estimated that investments in cassava research 
and development in Africa could generate some of the highest gains 
in agricultural GDP
26.
Urban food security. A major driver of production increases will be 
high prices of cereals on world markets, which sparked global food 
price inflation in 2008. In Africa, persistent urban poverty has boosted 
the consumption of cassava food products as consumers seek cheaper 
sources of calories
12. Among FAO’s recommendations to governments 
for holding down food prices is processing cassava into products that 
are marketable as instant foods with a long shelf-life
27. Cassava could 
also help improve the nutrition of low-income populations  – ne
w 
14  Save and Grow: Cassava
biofortified varieties produce roots that are rich in vitamin A, iron 
and zinc. 
Import substitution. Many governments have, or are considering, 
mandatory blending of mostly imported wheat flour with domestically 
produced cassava flour in bread making. Nigeria recently raised its 
levy on wheat flour to 100
 pe
rcent, and will use revenue for a cassava 
bread development fund11. It has also announced plans to substitute 
10 pe
rcent of the maize in poultry feed with cassava grits, which will 
increase annual demand for cassava roots by 480 000 tonnes 28. In 
East Africa, the animal feed industry is turning to cassava, as maize 
and wheat become increasingly unaffordable
29. 
Renewable energy. Global output of bio-ethanol could reach 155 bil-
lion litres by 2020, up from around 100 billion litres in 2010. Cassava 
cu
rrently contributes to only a small part of production, but demand 
from China is growing rapidly following its decision to no longer use 
cereals to produce biofuel. Currently, 50
 pe
rcent of China’s ethanol 
is derived from cassava roots and sweet potatoes, and in 2012 it was 
expected to produce 780
 mi
llion litres of ethanol from 6  mi
llion 
tonnes of dried cassava 13. China plans to develop cassava varieties 
suitable for biomass energy production in colder and drier regions of 
the country’s north
30.
New industrial uses. Worldwide, cassava is the second biggest source 
of starch, after maize, with production estimated at 8
 mi
llion tonnes a 
year. However, tropical countries import each year some US$80 mi
l-
lion worth of maize starch that could be replaced by starch from locally 
gr
own cassava13. In Thailand, which has earned some US$4 billion 
from starch exports since 2000, scientists are developing a variety 
with root starch that rivals premium “waxy” maize starch
31, 3 2 . A 
recent cassava mutation offers smaller root starch granules that reduce 
considerably the time and energy required for ethanol production
33.
Adaptation to climate change. Another factor that favours increased 
cassava production is the crop’s potential to adapt well to climate 
change. A recent study of the impacts of climate change on major 
staple crops in Africa found that cassava was the least sensitive to the 
climatic conditions predicted in 2030, and that its suitability would 
actually increase in most of the 5.5
 mi
llion sq  km a
rea surveyed. 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 15
Conversely, all other major food crops in the region, including maize, 
sorghum, millet, beans, potatoes and bananas, were expected to suffer 
largely negative impacts
34. 
As market demand grows, traditional cassava cropping systems are 
being replaced worldwide by more intensive production. In the years 
ahead, the trend towards intensification – aimed at achieving higher 
yields on the same area of land – is expected to strengthen in all 
cassava-producing regions. The alternative, expanding the harvested 
area, is not feasible in most countries owing to a diminishing supply 
of arable land and the high labour requirements of cassava cultiva -
tion. Past experience has also demonstrated that opening up new 
ar
eas for cassava can carry heavy environmental costs: in Thailand, 
expansion of the harvested area in the 1970s and 1980s led to massive 
deforestation
25. 
Farmers, industry and policymakers are seeking solutions to 
constraints to cassava yield increases 9. Smallholder producers in 
Brazil, India and Thailand have been highly successful in commercial 
production, obtaining yields of between 25 and 40 tonnes per ha, 
through more intensive farming. Although current African yields 
are less than half the global potential yield, root harvests of up to 
40
 to
nnes have been obtained in on-farm trials 35. In Nigeria, yields 
could reach 25 tonnes per ha and beyond with improved varieties, 
agronomic practices and crop management.
Rwanda plans to boost its cassava output in 2017 from the current 
2.5
 mi
llion tonnes to as much as 6.1 mi
llion tonnes, by disseminating 
higher-yielding varieties, training farmers in improved crop manage-
ment, and encouraging increased use of mineral fertilizer, pesticide 
an
d irrigation16. Supported by international donors, other African 
countries – including Ghana and the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo – have made similar plans for the commercialization of cassava, 
in line with the African Union’s Pan-Africa Cassava Initiative, which 
has identified Manihot esculenta as a key agricultural commodity, 
food security crop and “poverty fighter”
36. 
The future of cassava is likely to see, therefore, a shift to increased 
monocropping on larger fields, the widespread adoption of higher-
yielding genotypes that are more suited to industrialization, and higher 
rates of use of irrigation and agrochemicals. 
16  Save and Grow: Cassava
In promoting programmes for intensified cassava production, 
policymakers should consider the lessons of the Green Revolution. 
Based on genetically uniform crop varieties and intensive use of till-
age, irrigation, mineral fertilizer and pesticide, the Green Revolution 
mo
del of agriculture produced a quantum leap in global cereal yields 
and average per capita food consumption. But those enormous 
gains in productivity were often accompanied by negative effects on 
agriculture’s natural resource base, so serious that they jeopardize 
its productive potential in the future. In many countries, decades of 
intensive cropping have degraded fertile land and depleted ground-
water, provoked pest upsurges, eroded biodiversity, and polluted air, 
so
il and water37.  
Applying the same model to cassava production carries similar risks. 
A shift from traditional smallholder cassava farming systems – based 
on intercropping and periods of fallow to replenish soil nutrients
39 – to 
more intensive monocropping may simplify management and favour 
initially higher yields. Experience has shown, however, that it also 
increases the prevalence of pests and diseases, and accelerates the 
depletion of soil nutrient stocks
35, 38.
  In s
outhern Brazil, year-round demand for cassava for starch 
processing has led to continuous monocropping in the same field, 
overlapping planting dates, increasing use of genetically uniform 
varieties, and greater need for agrochemicals to maintain soil fertil-
ity and combat pests and diseases
24. In Rwanda, higher cropping 
densities under intensification have created pest and disease pressure 
that is negatively affecting yields
16. As warmer conditions start to 
favour intensive cassava production in new areas of Africa, Asia and 
South America, the risk of pest and disease problems is expected to 
increase
24.
Continuous cultivation of cassava – involving at least 10 years of 
production on the same piece of land with less than one year of fallow 
between crops – is already widespread in sub-Saharan Africa, espe-
cially in non-humid and highland zones
40. In East Africa, agricultural 
landscapes have changed from traditional systems with an important 
fallow component to continuous cassava-based production
35.
With intensification, many of Africa’s cassava growers have elimi-
nated fallow periods altogether and are not compensating for nutrient 
lo
sses by adopting soil fertility management techniques, such as cover 
crops and manure application. Declining levels of soil nutrients lead to 
falling yields, to the point where production becomes unprofitable
39. 
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop 17
With “Save and Grow”, 
tropical countries 
can avoid the risks of 
intensified cassava 
production
In northeast Thailand, several years of cassava cultivation in upland 
areas led to a decline in soil fertility owing to erosion, tillage practices 
that removed soil cover, and the failure of farmers to incorporate 
residues in the soil
41. In Colombia, yields of monocropped cassava 
dropped from 37 tonnes to 12 tonnes per ha over a period of nine years 
owing to soil degradation.
In Nigeria, research found that soil erosion increases when 
traditional mixed cropping is replaced by monoculture
42. Moreover, 
traditional practices, found to be highly successful in reducing soil 
erosion under polyculture, are less effective when used in monocul-
ture
42. In trials in Viet Nam, monoculture of cassava produced yields 
of 19 to
nnes, but resulted in severe, unsustainable soil losses to erosion 
of more than 100 tonnes per ha43. 
In 2010, FAO endorsed an ecosystem-based approach to crop 
production intensification, one that is both highly productive and 
environmentally sustainable
44. Dubbed “Save and Grow”, it calls for 
“greening” the Green Revolution through farming practices that draw 
on nature’s contributions to crop growth, such as soil organic matter, 
water flow regulation, pollination and bio-control of insect pests and 
diseases. The key principles underpinning “Save and Grow” are:
 maintaining healthy soil to enhance crop nutrition
 cultivating a wider range of crop species and varieties in associa -
t
ions, rotations and sequences
 using well-adapted, high-yielding varieties and good quality seed
 efficient water management that produces more crops per drop
 preventative management of insect pests, diseases and weeds.
T
his eco-friendly model of agriculture encourages reduced or 
zero-tillage in order to boost yields while restoring soil health. It 
controls insect pests by protecting their natural enemies rather than by 
spraying crops indiscriminately with pesticide. It uses mineral fertilizer 
sparingly, in combination with organic sources of soil nutrients
37.
Supporting evidence from agricultural development projects in 
57 developing countries has shown that more efficient use of water, 
reduced use of pesticide and improvements in soil health boost crop 
yields by around 80
 pe
rcent45. Another study concluded that farming 
systems that conserve ecosystem services, through conservation 
tillage, crop diversification, legume intensification and biological pest 
control, perform just as well as high-input intensive systems
46, 47.
18  Save and Grow: Cassava
This guide shows how “Save and Grow” can help developing 
countries avoid the risks of unsustainable intensification, while real-
izing cassava’s potential for producing higher yields, alleviating rural 
po
verty and contributing to national economic development. It shows, 
for example, how growing cassava with groundnuts produces not only 
high root yields but also much higher income than monocropping; 
how a predatory wasp has been far more effective than insecticide in 
defeating devastating outbreaks of cassava mealybug; and how rotat-
ing cassava with beans and sorghum restored yields where mineral 
fe
rtilizer alone had failed.
Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 present a set of adoptable and adaptable 
ecosystem-based practices that have enhanced cassava productivity 
and can serve as the cornerstone of national and regional programmes. 
Chapter 7 explores post-harvest uses and value addition. Chapter 8 
outlines policies that facilitate sustainable intensification of cassava 
production, and underlines the importance – when introducing new 
practices or technologies – of “letting farmers decide”.
Chapter 2
Farming systems
Many smallholder cassava growers 
already practise key “Save and Grow” 
recommendations: reduced or zero 
tillage, protecting the soil surface  
with organic cover, and crop 
diversification. 

Chapter 2: Farming Systems  21
I
n “Save and Grow”, farming systems are founded on three key 
recommendations1. First, farmers should aim at protecting soil 
structure, soil organic matter and overall soil health by limiting 
mechanical disturbance of the soil. That means minimizing 
“conventional tillage”, the practice of ploughing, harrowing or hoeing 
land before every crop and during crop growth. Instead, farmers are 
encouraged to practise conservation tillage, which excludes opera -
tions that invert the soil and bury crop residues. Common forms of 
co
nservation tillage are strip or minimum tillage, which disturbs only 
the portion of the soil that is to contain the seed row or planting hole, 
and zero tillage, in which ploughing or hoeing are eliminated. 
Along with conservation tillage, FAO recommends maintaining 
a protective organic cover on the soil surface, i.e. using crops and 
mulches to reduce soil erosion, conserve soil water and nutrients, and 
suppress weeds. Organic soil cover not only improves soil’s physical 
properties; it also encourages the proliferation of soil biota – including 
earthworms and beneficial protozoa, fungi and bacteria – that promote 
soil health and crop performance. In zero tillage systems, crops are 
planted directly through a mulch formed by the residues of previous 
crops or cover crops.
Third, farmers should cultivate a wider range of plant species in 
associations, sequences and rotations that may include trees, shrubs 
and pasture. Mixed cropping diversifies production, which helps 
farmers to reduce risk, respond to changes in market demand and 
adapt to external shocks, including climate change. Rotating or as -
sociating nutrient-demanding crops with soil-enriching legumes, and 
sh
allow-rooting crops with deep-rooting ones, maintains soil fertility 
and crop productivity and interrupts the transmission of crop-specific 
pests and diseases. 
By improving levels of soil organic matter and biotic activity, 
reducing pest and disease pressure, reducing erosion and increasing 
the availability of crop water and nutrients, those three practices 
increase yields sustainably. They also lower production costs, mainly 
through savings on machinery, fossil fuel and external inputs such as 
irrigation, mineral fertilizer and pesticide. 
22  Save and Grow: Cassava
To till or not to till?
C
assava needs a sufficiently loose-textured soil to facilitate 
initial root penetration and to allow for root thickening. It also 
succumbs easily to weed competition, excessive soil moisture and 
root rot. For those reasons, it is usually planted in soil that has been 
loosened and cleared of weeds by hoeing or ploughing. On degraded 
and unstructured soils, conventional tillage makes it easier to insert 
stakes in the ground and provides well-drained, aerated conditions 
for the root system
2, 3.
However, crop yields are a function not of tillage, but of soil condi-
tions. Cassava stakes can also be planted, and can produce good yields, 
in s
oil that has not been tilled, provided that the soil is healthy, well 
structured and free of compaction 4. Friable soils, high in organic 
matter, provide ideal conditions for zero-till cultivation2. A study of 
smallholder cassava production in East and West Africa found that 
cassava was more frequently planted on seedbeds without prior land 
preparation than any other staple crop, except rice. Where soils had 
poor physical properties, farmers planted it on manually prepared 
mounds or ridges
5.
Continuous conventional tillage, especially when done with heavy, 
tractor-mounted ploughs, harrows and rototillers, buries the soil’s 
protective cover, kills soil biota, causes the rapid decomposition of 
organic matter, and degrades soil structure by pulverizing soil ag -
gregates. Ploughing or hoeing the soil at the same depth, season after 
se
ason, often leads to the formation of a hardpan, a compacted soil 
layer – usually found below the topsoil – that is difficult for water and 
roots to penetrate
6. In such soils, some kind of mechanical loosening 
will be necessary for continued crop production, but at the cost of 
further soil degradation.
In that same soil, growing cassava without tillage may produce lower 
yields in the initial years. In the longer term, however, by reducing 
mineralization, erosion and water loss, helping to build up organic 
matter and maintaining soil aggregate stability and internal drainage, 
zero tillage promotes root functioning to the maximum possible 
extent. Once soil health is restored, untilled land can produce high 
yields and do so at a lower cost to both the farmer and the farming 
system’s natural resource base
7-10. 
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  23
Currently, land is prepared for cassava in many different ways and 
at different intensities. Small-scale farmers in Indonesia, Viet Nam 
and many African countries, or wherever land is too steep for any 
kind of mechanization, usually use a hoe to loosen soil in the area 
to be planted. Since manual land preparation is labour-intensive, 
many farmers prepare only the planting hole itself. While that is a 
form of reduced tillage, it can also result in low yields if weeds are 
not controlled. 
In regions where farmers cultivate larger areas of cassava, they 
traditionally plough the fields with oxen or water buffaloes, usually 
in one or two passes. In mountainous areas of Colombia, farmers use 
a pair of oxen pulling a simple reversible plough
11. In Indonesia, they 
plough the field with oxen, and then create planting ridges by hand, 
using a short-handled hoe. In Kerala State, India, farmers hoe the soil, 
then make individual mounds for each cassava plant, a labour intensive 
approach requiring more than 30
 d
ays of labour per hectare.
In countries where cassava is grown intensively on larger areas, of 
from 2 to 5 ha
, land is usually prepared by tractor using a mouldboard 
or disc plough, generally followed by the use of a disc harrow and 
sometimes a ridger. Alternatively, the soil is loosened and residues and 
weeds are incorporated with a rototiller. However, this method tends 
to pulverize the soil and can lead to serious erosion on sloping land.
Many cassava farmers in southern Brazil practise conservation 
tillage. They generally grow a cover crop, such as black oats (Avena 
strigosa) or wheat, during the winter months to protect the soil surface, 
increase soil organic matter and suppress weeds. In the spring, before 
the cereal crop matures, they crush it with a tractor-drawn rolling 
drum, or kill it with herbicides, then plant cassava stakes with a 
mechanized planter directly through the mulch of the crop’s residues. 
In Paraguay, farmers practise hand-planting of cassava without tillage 
using black oats or leguminous shrubs as a winter cover crop
12. 
Many experiments have attempted to determine the best method 
of land preparation for cassava and the effectiveness of conservation 
tillage alternatives
11, 1 3 . However, evidence of the effect of different 
tillage options on yields is not conclusive: the results of trials in Africa, 
Asia and Latin America vary from year to year and from place to 
place. On a gentle slope in Colombia, reduced tillage – involving the 
preparation by hoe of the planting holes only – resulted in the highest 
yields of one variety, while the use of a tractor-mounted rototiller 
24  Save and Grow: Cassava
produced the highest yields of another 
variety (Figure 5). Both zero tillage and 
strip preparation with a hoe or rototiller 
produced significantly lower yields. But 
other trials in the same area – which 
compared zero tillage, ploughing with 
oxen, and strip tillage – found that zero 
tillage produced the highest yields as well 
as the lowest rates of soil erosion.
In a three-year experiment on a 25
 pe
r-
cent slope in Hainan Province, China, the 
hi
ghest yields, of 26 to
nnes per ha, were 
obtained by conventional ploughing and 
disking. Reduced tillage of the planting 
holes produced slightly lower per hectare 
yields, of 24.6
 to
nnes, while zero tillage 
and strip preparation produced lower yields still, of around 22.8 to
nnes. 
However, zero and reduced tillage also resulted in the lowest rate of 
soil erosion, which was a major problem on the steep slopes
14. 
In Brazil, average cassava yields over four years of trials were 
18.2 to
nnes per ha on zero-tilled plots, significantly lower than the 
24.7 to
nnes obtained with conventional tillage 15. However, in clay 
soil that had been previously planted with winter maize under zero 
tillage for four years, there were no significant differences between 
zero tillage and conventional tillage yields
16.
In a land preparation trial conducted for four consecutive years 
in Thailand, the standard practice – ploughing twice with a 3-disc 
plough followed by a 7-disc harrow – produced the highest yields, 
while zero tillage consistently produced the lowest yields
3. In another 
Thai experiment, however, tillage did not result in significant yield 
differences. Using a subsoiler followed by a chisel plough, researchers 
obtained an average root yield of some 22
 to
nnes per ha, compared 
to 20 to
nnes when the land was not tilled and weeds were controlled 
with herbicide17. 
Also in Thailand, with nitrogen fertilizer applied at the rate of 
100 kg p
er ha, the fresh root yield of cassava grown under zero tillage 
reached 67 to
nnes, significantly higher than the 53  to
nnes obtained 
using conventional tillage (Figure 6). In the second year, average yields 
from the unprepared plots fell to 49
 to
nnes, slightly less than the 
conventional tillage yield that year of 54 t
onnes17.
20
15
0
5
10
Strip
tillage
Rototiller Reduced
tillage
Zero
tillage
Variety A Variety B
Source: Annex Table 2.1
Figure 5 Effect of tillage system on cassava root yield, 
Colombia (t/ha)
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  25
A study in Nigeria found that yields under con -
ventional ridge tillage were up to 46  pe rcent higher 
than those obtained in untilled fields18, although zero 
tillage was practised by the majority of local farmers. 
However, the trial beds were planted at the height of 
the rainy season in June, when levels of soil moisture 
were higher and soil temperatures lower, which delayed 
the emergence of plants in the zero-tilled plots and led 
to a substantial number of rotten stems
18. In fact, when 
planted at the onset of the rainy season, in March, 
cassava emergence was higher under zero tillage
19. 
Other trials in Cameroon and Nigeria have found that 
cassava yields were not affected by tillage
18, 20; in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, yields were higher 
in untilled than tilled oxisols, and similar in sandy 
loam soil, provided the field was mulched
2.
Finally, a recent study of an 8-year experiment in 
sandy loam soil in Colombia concluded that zero 
tillage was more effective in building up 
soil nutrients and conserving the soil’s 
physical properties and, when combined 
with mulching of residues, produced the 
highest root yields, with or without min-
eral fertilizer (Figure 7). Weighing up the 
co
sts and benefits, the study concluded 
that zero tillage compared favourably 
with conventional tillage and, in the 
long term, was “an optimum system” for 
cassava production
21. 
Based on the evidence presented, no 
single method of land preparation can 
be described as “best for cassava”. As a 
general conclusion, it can be inferred 
that the effects of tillage on cassava yield 
are variable from year to year and that the benefits of zero tillage in 
terms of erosion control are usually positive. Research also indicates 
that some land preparation is necessary in areas with heavy, poorly 
drained soils or where soils are already badly degraded. However, even 
in those cases, the need for tillage can be reduced through practices 
Source: Annex Table 2.2
80
70
60
0
40
30
20
10
50
0-50-50 50-50-50 100-50-50
Conventional tillage
* N-P2O5-K2O in kg/ha
Zero tillage
Figure 6 Effect of tillage system  
and fertilizer* on cassava root yield, 
Thailand (t/ha)
Fertilized Unfertilized
7
6
5
0
3
2
1
4
Conventional
tillage
Conventional
tillage+mulch
Zero
tillage
Zero tillage 
+mulch
Source: Annex Table 2.3
Figure 7 Cassava yield response to surface  
plant mulch, fertilizer and tillage, Colombia (t/ha)
26  Save and Grow: Cassava
that improve soil structure, organic matter content and drainage, 
such as mulching2. 
Cassava growers should be encouraged to adopt minimum tillage 
and, ideally, zero tillage, especially on well-aggregated, friable soils 
with an adequate level of organic matter. Since yields do not depend 
on tillage per se, but on soil health, it is also recommended that, in 
tillage trials, changes in soil structure and organic matter under a 
zero-till regime be monitored closely, as those factors are likely to have 
a long-term positive impact on cassava yields and are good indicators 
of sustainability. 
Even where conservation tillage produces lower yields, it offers 
farmers economic advantages: reduced spending on the fuel and 
equipment needed for conventional tillage, and – since it reduces soil 
erosion, conserves soil moisture and helps maintain soil health – the 
opportunity to produce cassava more intensively and sustainably, 
without the need for high levels of external inputs
22. Conservation 
tillage will also be important as an alternative to conventional tillage 
in cassava-growing areas affected by climate change. Where rainfall is 
reduced, it will help to conserve soil moisture; where rainfall increases, 
it will help reduce soil erosion and improve soil structure, allowing 
better internal drainage
23. 
Cover crops and mulching
M
aintaining a continuous ground cover is another basic “Save 
and Grow” practice that is also essential for reaping the full 
benefits of conservation tillage. Ground cover is especially important 
in cassava production – because the initial growth of cassava is slow, 
the soil is exposed to the direct impact of rain during the first 2 to 
3
 mo
nths of its growth cycle, and the wide spacing between planted 
stakes favours the emergence of weeds. To protect the soil surface, 
reduce runoff and erosion, and inhibit weed growth, “Save and Grow” 
recommendations include covering the soil surface with mulch, such as 
crop residues, or growing cover crops (also called “live mulch”) during 
fallow periods or during cassava establishment. Mulching seedbeds 
is recommended especially when growing cassava on slopes prone to 
soil erosion. Cassava stakes can be planted directly through the mulch 
cover, with little or no land preparation
24. 
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  27
Mulch cover also serves as an insulating layer that reduces diurnal 
temperature variations and water evaporation, even during periods 
of prolonged drought. It increases the soil organic matter content 
and provides a favourable environment for soil micro-organisms and 
below-ground fauna. By improving physical soil conditions – reduced 
soil temperatures, higher levels of moisture, increased water infiltra-
tion capacity and lower evaporation – it favours higher yields
16. 
In a 3-year trial in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the 
application of 5  to
nnes of rice straw on late season cassava led to 
an increase in soil pH, organic carbon content, total nitrogen, soil-
available phosphorus and soil exchangeable cations. Mulched cassava 
plants produced more and bigger storage roots than unmulched plants, 
and the dry storage root yield increased 
each year, from an average of 4.3
 to
nnes 
to 5.6  to
nnes per ha, irrespective of 
the cultivar used.  In the first, second 
and third year, yields were 17
 pe
rcent, 
28 pe
rcent and 58  pe
rcent higher, re -
spectively, than those of unmulched 
ca
ssava (Figure 8)25.
Growing cover crops between cas -
sava cropping cycles is regarded mainly 
as
 a soil improvement practice (see 
Chapter 5, Crop nutrition). However, 
it can also help reduce weed infesta -
tions. Fast-growing legumes smother 
ma
ny unwanted weeds that normally 
proliferate during cassava establishment 
and after the cassava harvest, thus providing weed control that is 
less labour-intensive than manual weeding and less expensive than 
spraying with herbicides (see also Chapter 6, Pests and diseases). 
Trials have found that while perennial legumes are more effective 
for soil protection than commonly intercropped grain legumes, such 
as beans and cowpeas, highly productive perennials, such as stylo 
(Stylosanthes guianensis) competed strongly with cassava for nutrients 
and reduced root yields considerably. However, with less aggressive 
legumes, such as pintoi groundnuts ( Arachis pintoi), the yield loss 
was less serious
26. 
6
5
4
0
2
1
3
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
Mulched*
* rice straw at 5 t/ha
Unmulched
Source: Annex Table 2.4 
Figure 8 Effect of mulching on dry root yield of late season 
cassava, Democratic Republic of the Congo (t/ha)
28  Save and Grow: Cassava
When grown as a 
monocrop, cassava is 
usually planted with 
spacing of 1 m, making 
10 000 plants per hectare
Mixed cropping
A
lthough cassava is widely grown as a monocrop in Thailand and 
southern Brazil, intercropping is practised by smallholder cassava 
farmers in many parts of the tropics. Subsistence growers, or those 
with very limited areas of land, generally plant the space between 
cassava rows with early maturing crops, such as maize, upland rice and 
various types of grain legumes, including common beans, cowpeas, 
mungbeans and groundnuts. The practice has many benefits – it 
protects the soil from the direct impact of rain, reduces soil erosion 
from runoff, and limits weed growth during the early stages of cassava 
development. 
Intercropping also produces crops that can be harvested at different 
times during the year, increases total net income per unit area of land, 
and reduces the risk of total crop failure. In south-western Nigeria, 
for example, maize and cassava are often planted in the first of two 
annual rainy seasons; the maize is harvested during a short break in 
the rains, after which the cassava continues alone. Since the two crops 
have different pest and disease complexes and growth requirements, 
one may survive even if the other fails. Some farmers even plant a 
second maize crop – cassava is less risky and the maize, if it succeeds, 
provides a bonus
27.
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  29
In Indonesia, farmers 
plant cassava along with 
faster growing crops, such 
as maize and rice. After 
the cereal harvest, they 
plant groundnuts
Growing cassava with short-duration grain legumes has an added 
advantage: it supplies both carbohydrates and protein, which provide 
the foundation of a healthy diet for the farming household. It has 
been estimated that one hectare of cassava intercropped with black 
common beans ( Phaseolus spp.) can produce around 10
 to
nnes of 
fresh cassava roots with 30 pe
rcent starch and 600 kg o
f beans with 
28 pe
rcent protein – enough to meet the annual requirements of five 
adults and leaving a surplus of about 6  to
nnes of cassava for use as 
animal feed or for sale2. 
In many parts of Africa, c
assava is grown with a wide range of other 
crops, either in a regular pattern or an irregular mixture of various 
crops that are continuously harvested and replanted as space becomes 
available. In West Africa, farmers often plant from 5 to 10
 ca
ssava 
stakes along the edge of large mounds, and plant crops such as maize, 
beans and melons in the middle of the mounds. 
In Indonesia, upland rice is grown between the cassava rows, while 
maize is grown between the cassava plants in the rows themselves. 
Once the rice and maize are harvested, at about four months after 
planting, the inter-row space is replanted with grain legumes, such as 
soybeans and groundnuts. In some areas, the long rainy season allows 
the planting of a fourth intercrop, such as mungbeans, after the grain 
legumes have been harvested. That very intensive intercropping allows 
the production of up to five crops a year on a very small area of land. 
Trials in Viet Nam showed that cassava intercropped with ground-
nuts ( Arachis hypogaea ) p
 roduced not only high root yields, of 
30.7 to
nnes per ha, but also much higher income than monocropping 
30  Save and Grow: Cassava
(Figure 9). At 32 to nnes per 
ha, monoculture yields were 
slightly better than those 
of the cassava/groundnut 
system and production 
costs were almost 30
 pe
r-
cent lower. However, the 
hi
gh commercial value of 
the groundnut yield, of 
1.5
 to
nnes per ha, resulted 
in a total net income 50 pe
r-
cent higher than that of the 
mo
noculture. 
In the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, 
planting cassava with spac-
ing of 2
 m bet ween rows 
and 0.5  m wi
thin the row 
(instead of the usual 1  m x 1  m) a
llowed for two successive legume 
intercrops, of groundnuts and climbing beans. The crop arrangement 
did not affect the cassava root yield, and the extra income generated 
from legume sales amounted to almost US$1
 00
0 per ha28. In India, 
intercropping with banana produced higher cassava root yields, while 
the highest net return was obtained by combining cassava with french 
beans or cowpeas
29. 
In northeast Thailand, dairy farmers have developed a “food-feed” 
system of cassava intercropped with cowpeas. The cowpea crop 
produces up to 2.4
 to
nnes of fodder per ha, which is fed along with 
dried cassava leaves to their cows. While the system produces generally 
lower root yields, compared with monocropping, researchers found 
that it increased land use efficiency and resulted in higher economic 
returns
30. 
In
tercropping requires careful selection of the crops – and the most 
suitable varieties of each crop – to be planted, careful timing of plant-
ing, good fertilization, and optimum plant densities and distribution. 
In N
igeria, the success of maize/cassava combinations depends on the 
time and the rate of recovery of the cassava after the maize harvest. 
Research found that cassava root yields dropped from 31.6
 to
nnes per 
ha to less than 20  to
nnes with high densities of maize planting and 
maize yields that exceeded 3.5 to
nnes27. In trials in Thailand, planting 
30
0
20
15
10
5
25
Cassava+groundnut Cassava+mungbean Monoculture
Production costs Gross income Net income
Source: Annex Table 2.5
Figure 9 Production costs and income of three intercropping trials  
with cassava, Viet Nam (million dong)
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  31
In Thailand, 
intercropping cassava 
with cowpea (above) 
results in generally lower 
root yields, but enough 
cattle fodder to produce 
higher net income
cowpeas (Vigna unguiculata) and sword beans (Canavalia gladiata) 
at the same time as cassava, over a period of four years, resulted in 
lower yields than when cassava was grown alone. However, moving the 
planting date three weeks after that of cassava reduced competition 
during cassava’s early growth stages, which allowed it to establish 
better and produce root yields exceeding those of the monocrop
31. 
The effectiveness of intercrops in reducing soil erosion depends 
on whether they have been able to produce enough foliage in time 
to protect the soil surface from rainfall. That may explain why 
experience with intercropping as a means of soil erosion control is 
mixed. Intercropping with groundnuts, pumpkins, squash or sweet 
corn was judged not very effective in Thailand, but growing cassava 
along with maize in Viet Nam and with mungbeans in Thailand was 
“quite effective”
32. 
More consistent results in reducing soil erosion have been achieved 
by planting cassava with protective hedgerows, or “live barriers”, a 
low-cost alternative to engineered soil conservation options such as 
contour bunds or bench terraces
33. Hedgerows filter and slow the rate 
of runoff and can be created using various recommended grasses, 
perennial legumes and other plants, or established naturally from 
native grasses and other species left as unhoed or unploughed strips in 
the field
2, 34. Farmers in several Asian countries protect their fields with 
hedgerows of vetiver grass (Vetiveria zizanioides), the shrub Tephrosia 
candida, the grass Paspalum atratum and closely-spaced pineapple. 
Vetiver grass, especially, is recommended for reducing severe erosion 
of already degraded land. 
An added advantage of planting hedgerows is that, when pruned 
regularly, they provide in situ mulch, which makes these systems par-
ticularly effective in reducing erosion and less laborious than carrying 
mu
lch from elsewhere. Pineapples can be harvested and sold, while 
paspalum and other grasses can be cut and fed to cattle and buffaloes.
In trials in Viet Nam, monoculture of cassava without hedgerows 
produced yields of 19 to
nnes per ha, but resulted in severe soil losses of 
more than 100 to
nnes per ha. Intercropped with groundnuts, cassava 
root yields were slightly higher and soil losses fell to 65 to
nnes, a big 
improvement but unsustainable in the long term. Cassava grown with 
groundnuts and vetiver hedgerows recorded the highest root yields, 
of 23.7
 to
nnes, the lowest soil losses, of 32 to
nnes, and the highest net 
income of all the treatments tested (Figure 10). 
32  Save and Grow: Cassava
Another type of intercropping is agroforestry, in which trees and 
perennial shrubs are grown along with crops. In India, cassava is 
grown under mature coconut palms and rubber trees 35. Cassava 
may also be planted in alleyways between rows of deep-rooting and 
fast-growing leguminous trees, such as Leucaena leucocephala and 
Gliricidia sepium. The fo-
liage is cut back regularly 
an
d the prunings are either 
incorporated into the soil of 
the alleys or – in a zero-till 
system – applied as mulch 
before the cassava is planted. 
Since the trees fix large 
amounts of atmospheric ni-
trogen and their roots draw 
nu
trients from deeper soil 
layers, the decomposition of 
prunings fertilizes the alley 
soil and boosts the yield of 
alley crops. In dryer climates, 
trees are deeper-rooting and 
thus compete less for water 
and nutrients than other intercrops. In agroforestry systems with 
cassava, leaf cuttings from the forage legume Flemingia macrophylla 
were found to have a particularly positive effect on root yield
36. In 
Benin, a combination of mineral fertilizer and the application of 
3
 to
nnes per ha of pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan) mulch led to significant 
root yield increases37. 
While cassava is rarely rotated with cereals in cassava-growing areas 
with poor soils and unpredictable rainfall, it is a common practice in 
cereal-growing areas in parts of Africa, where cassava’s ample litter 
falls and post-harvest residues are used by farmers to maintain soil 
fertility. Maize yields benefit substantially from the nitrogen released 
by the decomposition of green, leafy cassava biomass
38. 
In marginal areas where cassava is the main crop, it can be rotated 
with grain legumes, such as beans, groundnuts, mungbeans, cowpeas 
and soybeans, which fix atmospheric nitrogen and make it available to 
the successive cassava crop. In India, sequential cropping of cassava 
and cowpeas improved soil fertility to the point where applications of 
Cassava
monoculture
Cassava
+groundnuts 
Cassava
+groundnuts 
+vetiver hedgerows  
Source: Annex Table 2.6
120
100
60
0
20
40
Cassava yield Dry soil loss
Figure 10 Yield and dry soil loss in response to crop management 
treatments, Viet Nam (t/ha)
Chapter 2: Farming Systems  33
manure and mineral fertil -
izer could be reduced by 
50 pe
rcent, with no yield 
loss. Thanks to savings on 
external inputs, income 
from the cowpea-cassava 
sequential cropping system 
exceeded that of production 
using full fertilizer treat -
ments (Figure 11)
39. 
A study in Colombia 
found that yields of mono-
cropped, unfertilized cassa-
va dropped from 37 to nnes 
to 12 to
nnes per ha over a 
period of nine years. While 
moderate use, thereafter, of 
fertilizer had no positive effect on productivity, a rotational scheme 
– using sunn hemp ( Crotalaria juncea), maize, cassava, common 
beans, sorghum and cassava again – restored yields to 30
 to
nnes. 
Researchers concluded that soil nutrients were not deficient, but that 
the cassava had been unable to make use of them owing to biological 
soil degradation following years of continuous cassava production
40. 
In Thailand, a long-term experiment showed that rotating cassava 
yearly with groundnuts, followed by pigeon peas in the same year, 
contributed to a steady increase in cassava root yields, while yields 
under continuous cassava monocropping tended to decrease
31.
Many smallholder cassava production systems already incorporate, 
to varying degrees, the three key “Save and Grow” practices of 
minimizing soil disturbance, using organic soil cover and improving 
system resilience through crop diversification and cropping sequences. 
Those practices provide the foundation for sustainable intensifica -
tion of cassava production. However, they need to be supported by 
fo
ur additional “Save and Grow” practices: the use of well-adapted, 
high-yielding varieties and good quality planting material; efficient 
management of water resources; enhanced crop nutrition based on 
judicious use of mineral fertilizer combined with organic manures; 
and integrated management of insect pests, diseases and weeds. Those 
practices are described in the following chapters.
90
0
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
80
No treatment Half treatment Full treatment*
Production cost Gross income Net income
Source: Annex Table 2.7
* Full treatment=  26 kg/ha P + 25 tonnes/ha farmyard manure
Figure 11 Cost and benefit of sequential cropping with cassava  
and cowpea, India (‘000 Rs/ha)

Chapter 3
Varieties and 
planting material
The full potential of cassava  
will not be realized until production 
constraints are mitigated in higher-
yielding varieties and cassava growers  
have access to disease-free planting 
material. 

Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  37
F 
arming systems based on “Save and Grow” will use crops and 
varieties that are better adapted to ecologically based produc-
tion than those bred for high-input agriculture. More limited 
us
e of external inputs will require plants that are more produc-
tive, use nutrients and water more efficiently, have greater resistance 
to 
insect pests and diseases, and are more tolerant to drought, flood, 
frost and higher temperatures. 
Varieties will need to be adapted to less favoured areas and produc-
tion systems, produce food with higher nutritional value and desirable 
org
anoleptic properties, and help improve the provision of ecosystem 
services. Sustainable intensification will also require adaptation to 
climate change – greater genetic diversity will improve adaptability, 
while increased resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses will improve 
the resilience of cropping systems. 
Farmers will need the means and opportunity to deploy those 
materials in their production systems. That is why the management 
of plant genetic resources, development of crops and varieties, and the 
timely distribution of high quality seed are essential contributions to 
sustainable intensification
1. 
Among the world’s major staple food crops, cassava is well-known 
for its ability to produce reasonable yields on poor soils, in areas with 
low or erratic rainfall, and without agrochemicals and other external 
inputs. Those “hardy” traits have made cassava highly suitable for 
low-input, small-scale agriculture, while its inherent potentials have 
placed it among the crops most suitable for resource-poor farming in 
the tropics and neotropics under 21
st century climate change scenarios. 
However, cassava’s full potential will not be realized until some 
critical production constraints are mitigated in higher-yielding, well-
adapted varieties. For example, cassava is susceptible to waterlogging, 
to low temperatures at high elevations, and to a wide spectrum of 
mutable pests and diseases that can seriously affect yields. Climate 
change models indicate that it will be affected more by biotic con -
straints than drought and high temperatures
2. 
With the growing importance worldwide of cassava as a source of 
food, animal feed and industrial feedstock, there is increasing demand 
for cultivars with specific characteristics and adaptation to different 
ecologies. Niche varieties need to be developed and deployed to cater to 
increasingly diverse and competing end uses. In Africa, new varieties 
will be needed as cultivation expands into dry savannah, semi-arid and 
38  Save and Grow: Cassava
subtropical zones and the shift towards market-oriented production 
accelerates3.
The system that will provide high-yielding and adapted cassava 
varieties to smallholders has three parts: genetic resources conserva-
tion and distribution, variety development, and the production and 
de
livery to farmers of high quality, healthy planting material.
Conserving the cassava genepool
T
he genus Manihot consists of the cultivated species, Manihot 
esculenta, and – depending on the taxonomic classification used 
– from 70 to 100  wi
ld species4. Both wild relatives and traditional 
cultivars, or landraces, developed by farmers over centuries are the 
primary sources of genes and gene combinations for new varieties
4.
In the early 1970s, CIAT launched a major initiative to collect 
and conserve cassava landraces. Today, CIAT’s collection at Cali, 
in Colombia, is the world’s largest, containing about 5
 50
0 landrace 
accessions. The collection is maintained in a tissue culture laboratory, 
and a back-up in vitro collection is held at the International Potato 
Center in Lima. CIAT has created a “core collection” of about 630 
accessions that represents the wide genetic diversity found in the 
main collection and is used for intensive characterization and genetic 
analysis. A duplicate of the core collection is maintained in Thailand, 
both in vitro and in the field.
The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Ibadan, 
Nigeria, also has an important cassava genebank of some 2
 80
0 ac
ces-
sions, collected mainly in West Africa. The largest national collection, 
of 2
 90
0 ac
cessions, is held by the Brazilian Agricultural Research 
Corporation. Other major collections, totalling 7 20
0 accessions, are 
held by Benin, India, Indonesia, Malawi, Nigeria, Thailand, Togo and 
Uganda (Figure 12). Most other cassava-growing countries have estab-
lished a genebank of local landraces and improved varieties, although 
li
ttle documentation is available on many national collections4. 
Over the past two decades, biotechnologists and molecular breeders 
have used genebank accessions to determine which genes control 
specific traits, and in 1997 the first genetic map of cassava was an -
nounced
5. With the decreasing cost of molecular biology and biotech-
nology, the time is right to begin the genome-wide characterization 
Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  39
of cassava genetic diversity and to fill gaps in germplasm collections 
before valuable diversity is lost6. 
Further collection of landraces n
eeds to be carried out as farmers 
abandon their traditional cultivars for improved varieties. For example, 
CIAT’s genebank has limited representation from Central America and 
no accessions from Suriname or French Guiana
6. According to FAO’s 
Second report on the state of the world’s plant genetic resources for food 
and agriculture, priority countries for collecting in the Americas are 
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Haiti, Nicaragua, 
Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; in Africa, collecting 
needs to focus on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, 
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. Strategies for on-farm 
conservation and management of landraces also need to be developed 
to complement ex situ conservation
4.
Wild relatives of cultivated cassava could make an important 
contribution to the development of varieties suitable for sustainable 
intensification under low-input regimes. However, wild Manihot  
species have been poorly collected and poorly characterized and 
evaluated, and many populations are threatened in their native 
habitats
6. Land clearing in Brazil has been most extensive in areas that 
6000
5000
4000
0
2000
1000
3000
CIAT Brazil IITA India NigeriaUgandaMalawiIndonesiaThailandBenin Togo
Source: Annex Table 3.1
Figure 12 Major collections of cassava germplasm  
(number of accessions)
40  Save and Grow: Cassava
are the natural habitats of seven wild Manihot species which could 
be a valuable resource for future breeding of cassava for semi-arid 
environments. Deforestation of the Amazon Basin threatens forest 
species of Manihot, and urbanization and agricultural expansion are 
reducing the habitats of wild relatives native to Mesoamerica. Action 
is urgently needed, therefore, to realize long-standing proposals to 
create in situ reserves for wild Manihot
4.
The harmonization of passport and evaluation data on genebank 
accessions should also be a priority. Molecular biology tools, under-
pinned by robust information technology, would contribute to more 
ef
ficient data generation and dissemination, and facilitate global 
genotyping of cassava accessions. Data should be made publicly avail-
able through searchable databases in order to facilitate the acquisition 
of g
ermplasm that could be used to augment locally available heritable 
variations for the genetic improvement of the crop. 
That is a major undertaking, and will require the active collabora-
tion of CIAT, IITA, national programmes – particularly in the main 
pr
oducing countries and the crop’s centres of genetic diversity – and 
the advanced laboratories that work on cassava. Through multilateral 
mechanisms, especially the International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture, FAO can provide a much-needed 
neutral platform for synergistic cooperation.
Breeding improved varieties
E
arly introductions of cassava from Latin America to Africa and 
Asia represented a narrow genetic base, which limited the diversity 
available to farmers for selection of new varieties. In Thailand, for 
example, a single clone – Rayong 1 – was grown on 90
 pe
rcent of 
the entire cassava-cultivated area until the 1990s 7. The availability 
of superior varieties with combinations of many useful traits has 
improved remarkably in recent decades, as researchers at CIAT, IITA 
and several national breeding programmes have exploited the wide 
genetic diversity available in genebanks. 
The breeding and distribution of higher-yielding varieties with 
resistance or tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses have contributed 
to substantial increases in cassava yields and to overall production – 
especially in Asia – over the past 30
 ye
ars. It is estimated that improved 
Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  41
Cassava plants have 3 to 
11 smooth or winding leaf 
lobes, arranged spirally 
around the stem
Cassava roots are 
conical, cylindrical or 
irregular, and coloured 
cream, yellow and light to 
dark brown 
varieties are planted on 55
 pe rcent of Asia’s total cassava farming area. 
In Africa, the rate of adoption is lower, and in fact yields there are also 
much lower. In order to close the yield gap, therefore, the dissemination 
and adoption of improved varieties need to be promoted worldwide.
Higher yield and improved root quality are the most common 
breeding objectives, but others also receive breeders’ attention, includ-
ing resistance to insect pests and diseases, and tolerance to drought, 
wa
terlogging, low and high temperatures, high soil acidity and low soil 
phosphorus8-11. While some genebank accessions have been released 
directly as new varieties, most are used in crossing programmes to 
produce new varieties that combine high yield potential with other 
beneficial traits. 
The CIAT breeding programme has released clones with better 
resistance to cassava bacterial blight, super-elongation disease, white 
flies and thrips, and tolerance to root rot caused by Phytophthora water 
moulds. It has also developed cold-tolerant varieties that produce well 
in areas up to 1
 80
0 m ab
ove sea level, such as the tropical Andes and 
the East African highlands, and works with national programmes to 
develop varieties adapted to the seasonally cool subtropics of China, 
Brazil and Paraguay. 
More than half a million sexual seeds produced by CIAT have 
been distributed to national breeding programmes in Asia, which use 
them to make selections or to cross the best selections with their own 
promising lines. At least 50 improved varieties containing some Latin 
American germplasm supplied by CIAT have been released in Asia. 
42  Save and Grow: Cassava
CIAT has also supplied India’s Central Tuber Crops Research Institute 
with tissue culture plants of lines with high levels of resistance to the 
Indian and Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus. 
In four decades of work on cassava genetic improvement, IITA 
has produced more than 400 improved varieties with traits such as 
resistance to cassava mosaic disease (CMD), bacterial blight and green 
spider mites. The varieties have been released throughout sub-Saharan 
Africa, and are estimated to have doubled cassava yields in some 
countries. IITA’s scientists identified three different sources of CMD 
resistance – the wild “cassava tree” (Manihot glaziovii), found in Brazil, 
and two Nigerian landraces. Some 40 varieties resistant to CMD have 
been released in Nigeria, 36 in the United Republic of Tanzania, 30 in 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 14 in Malawi. The disease 
is now considered largely under control in areas where the resistant 
varieties are planted. 
Research at both CIAT and IITA has also focused on improving the 
nutritional value of cassava by increasing its vitamin A, iron and zinc 
content. Through breeding, scientists have been able to double the 
content of carotenoids, a precursor of vitamin A, in cassava roots
12. 
Cassava biofortified with vitamin A has been released in several coun-
tries, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria.
The cassava 
genepool has already been extensively tapped to produce 
income-generating technologies for farmers worldwide 6. Great 
scope exists for further improvements, as the rapid development of 
molecular technologies deepens our understanding of the structure 
and behaviour of the cassava genome, and the costs of sequencing and 
molecular marker development decline. 
With climate change threatening crop production in many parts 
of the world, breeding efforts will focus increasingly on “stacking” 
multiple traits in elite varieties. There should also be greater focus on 
developing varieties for niche agro-ecologies and – since almost all 
breeding is done in monoculture fields – for specific intercropping 
systems, rather than for wide adaptation. That is because low-income 
smallholders living in isolated areas with suboptimal soil conditions 
need “smarter”, locally adapted varieties that can produce very good 
yields with minimal use of agrochemicals or irrigation. 
National programmes should be encouraged, therefore, to intro-
duce the outputs of the pre-breeding activities of CIAT and IITA 
in
to their own breeding programmes that use landraces and other 
Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  43
farmer-preferred genotypes as parents. Until now, the focus has been 
on evaluating breeding lines from the CGIAR centres for wide adapta-
tions; that work must now be complemented by introgressing traits 
fr
om locally adapted materials.
There are promising examples of cassava breeding for specific 
industries and uses. Scientists at CIAT have identified a cassava muta-
tion with root starch containing zero or near-zero amylose13, which 
has extremely useful applications in industry 14. That “waxy starch” 
characteristic is now being incorporated into high-yielding commer-
cial varieties by the Thai Tapioca Development Institute15. CIAT has 
also identified an induced mutation that has starch granules one-third 
the normal size, with a rough outer surface. The starch is expected 
to be useful to the fuel-ethanol industry, as it requires less time and 
energy to convert the starch into sugar, the first stage in fermentation 
for ethanol production
16. 
Other on-going work at CIAT and partner organizations include 
the routine application of molecular tools in cassava genetic improve-
ment. For instance, a number of molecular markers for tracing the 
in
heritance of resistance to whiteflies, green mites and bacterial blight 
are at varying stages of validation. 
Molecular markers associated with a specific gene for resistance to 
cassava mosaic disease are being used to select for resistance to this 
devastating disease. High-yielding, locally adapted cassava varieties 
resistant to CMD have been developed by CIAT as a precautionary 
measure against the real possibility of the virus’s appearing on the 
American continent. The use of molecular markers is also making 
the trans-continental transfer of cassava germplasm possible. Latin 
American cassava genotypes have been successfully introduced into 
African cassava breeding programmes as the markers provided an 
efficient means for deploying only those genotypes with resistance 
to CMD. 
Following the first demonstration of successful genetic transfor -
mation in cassava in 1996, a number of transgenic genotypes with 
im
proved resistance to viruses and abiotic stress, reduced levels of 
cyanogenic glycoside content, better nutritional qualities and modified 
starch yield and characteristics have been developed
17. Initially, the 
capacity for developing cassava transgenes was restricted to a few 
advanced laboratories in the United States of America and Europe. 
However, cassava can now be genetically transformed in a number 
44  Save and Grow: Cassava
of laboratories in Asia and Africa as well. The wide applicability of 
this potentially useful means of producing “designer varieties” with 
novel traits is enhanced by the continued development of genotype-
independent protocols for genetic transformation in cassava. 
While there are a few cases of controlled trials of transgenic cassava 
genotypes, none has been officially released anywhere in the world. 
In addition to the technical challenges, intellectual property rights 
and biosafety issues will need to be addressed before genetic trans -
formation can become a method of choice for cassava improvement. 
Re
cognizing those constraints, CIAT is investigating the production 
of non-transgenic herbicide-resistant varieties that would reduce the 
labour cost of weeding, which currently accounts for 20 to 40
 pe
rcent 
of production costs, and could greatly facilitate the adoption of 
reduced-tillage practices
6.
 Farmer participation in variety trials and the choice of selection 
criteria (known as participatory plant breeding, or PPB), needs to 
become a key step in the development of new varieties. Farmers’ 
criteria must inform all stages of selection, and trials in farmers’ fields 
should begin as early as possible in the selection process. National 
programmes should incorporate PPB principles into the development 
and deployment of improved cassava varieties, especially with the 
increasing demand for niche cultivars suited to particular environ -
ments, cropping systems or end-uses. Agricultural extension services 
in m
any countries will need to be substantially upgraded to ensure 
that smallholder farmers reap the full benefits of improved cassava 
varieties.
Planting material
T
he use of high quality planting materials that maintain genetic 
purity and are free of diseases and pathogens is crucial in cassava 
production. With vegetatively propagated crops, diseases and pests 
can build up over several generations of propagation, a problem that 
is negligible with botanic seeds. In addition, cassava stem cuttings 
are perishable, bulky and cumbersome to transport, and require 
considerable storage space. As cassava under subsistence agriculture 
is typically harvested piecemeal over a period of one year or more, 
storage of stakes until the next planting is logistically challenging. 
Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  45
Stakes cut from healthy 
stems free of pests and 
diseases have a higher 
rate of sprouting and 
produce higher root yields 
As a result, many farmers do not save cassava stems for planting 
and frequently source cuttings from neighbours or in local markets; 
under such conditions, assuring the quality of planting material is 
practically impossible. 
Effective systems for routine multiplication and distribution of 
disease-free planting material of improved varieties is essential for 
sustainable intensification. Among major cassava producers, Thailand 
has been the most successful in disseminating improved varieties 
to its cassava farmers. In 1994, the Thai Government established a 
special programme for the rapid multiplication and distribution of 
new varieties with high yield potential, high harvest index, high root 
starch content and early harvestability. The programme involved 
the country’s Department of Agriculture and Kasetsart University’s 
Faculty of Agriculture, which supplied the basic planting material, 
and the Department of Agricultural Extension and the Thai Tapioca 
Development Institute, which multiplied and distributed it. By 2000, 
almost 90
 pe
rcent of Thailand’s cassava area was planted to the recom-
mended cultivars, compared to less than 10 pe rcent a decade earlier7, 18. 
Although several protocols have been developed for the rapid 
multiplication of cassava, and could be scaled up for the dedicated pro-
duction of material that meets quality standards19, very few countries 
have a formal seed system for cassava multiplication. Efforts to involve 
the private sector have made little progress, owing mainly to the plant’s 
low multiplication rate, compared to that of cereals – while one cassava 
stake can produce in a year enough stems for 10
 ne
w stakes, a maize 
seed can yield 300 new seeds three months after planting.
46  Save and Grow: Cassava
In India, the indiscriminate use of infected planting material, the 
non-availability of resistant varieties and the lack of commercial 
interest in supplying healthy planting material have resulted in 
the widespread incidence of cassava mosaic disease. The country’s 
Central Tuber Crops Research Institute has developed procedures 
for multiplying virus-free cassava meristems in vitro. However, no 
private firms have adopted the technology in order to supply farmers 
with virus-free cassava plants on a large scale, as they have done for 
other high-value horticultural crops, such as banana and potatoes
20.
To increase the efficiency of cassava stem production, IITA and 
Nigeria’s National Root Crops Research Institute have developed 
a rapid multiplication technology, which involves cutting cassava 
stems into stakes with 2 or 3
 no
des, rather than the usual 5 to 7. With 
efficient field management, cassava stems can be harvested twice a 
year, at 6
 an
d 12 mo
nths after planting, yielding around 50 times more 
stems than were used for planting21. A study in 2010 found that one-
third of cassava farmers in Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria, were using the 
technology to multiply stems of improved varieties, which they sold to 
other farmers; their average earnings from sales were US$750 a year
22.
In the absence of a national cassava seed system, cassava develop-
ment programmes in a number of African countries have used a 3-tier 
com
munity-based system of rapid multiplication to supply farmers 
with improved, healthy planting material23. At the top level, material 
from breeders is multiplied under optimal agronomic conditions 
on research stations and government farms to produce disease-free 
foundation seed. The secondary level involves further multiplication 
on 2
 ha f
arms often run by farmer groups, community organizations 
and NGOs. Certified material is then distributed to tertiary multiplica-
tion sites, which are the main and most readily accessible source of 
st
ems24. In several countries, the approach includes the distribution 
of “seed vouchers”, which allow low-income farmers to buy stems at 
subsidized prices. 
It is estimated that more than 300
 00
0 ho
useholds in western Kenya 
and 80 pe
rcent of small-scale cassava farmers in Uganda are growing 
improved varieties multiplied and distributed through the system23. 
The African Technology Uptake and Up-scaling Support Initiative 
(TUUSI) has called on the region’s policymakers to promote the 3-tier 
approach more widely and to encourage the formal seed sector to 
become involved in the certification, multiplication and distribution 
Chapter 3: Varieties and Planting Material  47
of high quality planting material. TUUSI also recommends the 
participation of NGOs and farmer associations as the best means of 
ensuring that research outputs are adopted by the largest number of 
cassava growers
23. 
A high level of grassroots participation in multiplication was 
achieved by the Great Lakes Cassava Initiative, managed by Catholic 
Relief Services and supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 
Implemented in six countries of East and Central Africa, the initia -
tive involved 10
 ag ricultural research institutes, 53  lo cal NGOs and 
some 3 00
0 fa
rmer groups. It established a network of 6  50
0 sm
all 
multiplication plots, averaging 0.3 ha
, each serving around 350 lo
cal 
farmers, and helped disseminate a total of 33.6  mi
llion stems. The 
initiative also put in place a low-cost quality management protocol, 
based on visual assessment, to evaluate varietal purity and score for 
pests and diseases
25.
The use of poor-quality planting material will remain one of the 
major causes of low cassava yields, especially in Latin America and 
Africa, for some time to come. In the absence of efficient systems 
of multiplication and distribution, farmers can help to improve the 
situation using some simple local practices:
 Cut stems f rom vigorous plants which are 8 to 12  mo nths old, 
show no symptoms of pests or diseases, are growing in fertile soil, 
and produce high root yields. The long, straight primary stems of 
late-branching varieties are the most suitable.
 Store cut stems i n an upright position in the shade, with the base 
of the stems resting on soil that has been loosened with a hoe and 
is watered regularly. Stems that have been stored for no more than 
5
 d
ays before being cut into stakes will sprout more quickly.
 Cut stems into stakes 2 0 cm l ong, each with 5 to 7  no des, imme-
diately prior to planting. The diameter of the stakes should be at 
le
ast 3 cm
, while the diameter of the pith should be less than half 
the diameter of the stem.
 Before planting, s oak the stakes for 5 to 10  mi nutes in hot water 
to kill pests or disease-causing organisms that might be present. 
Getting the right water temperature is also simple – mix equal 
amounts of boiling and cold water
26. 
To ensure high yields, the stakes’ mother plants should have been 
adequately fertilized. Cassava plants grown in soil with low levels of 
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium produce stakes that are also low 
48  Save and Grow: Cassava
in those nutrients, and are also low in starch, reducing sugars and 
total sugars. In turn, plants grown from stakes with a lower nutrient 
content have a lower rate of sprouting, produce fewer stems and have 
lower root yields (Annex table 3.2)
27. 
Even within a uniformly fertilized field, some plants grow better 
and produce more roots than others. Farmers can increase the size of 
their next cassava harvest by cutting the stems to be used as planting 
material only from plants with high root yields. This simple practice 
will markedly increase production, especially when using traditional 
varieties that may be susceptible to pests and diseases. 
Chapter 4
Water 
management
Once established, cassava can grow  
in areas that receive just 400 mm  
of average annual rainfall.  
But much higher yields are obtained  
with higher levels of water supply.

Chapter 4: Water Management  51
T
he sole source of water for around 80 pe rcent of the world’s 
farmland is rainfall. Rainfed crop production accounts for as 
much as 60 pe
rcent of global agricultural output and is the 
source of livelihoods and food security for millions of the 
world’s poorest farmers. Irrigated agriculture, with its higher cropping 
intensities and higher average yields, produces up to three times more 
from the same unit area of land. 
Both rainfed and irrigated agriculture face major challenges. 
As competition for increasingly scarce water resources intensifies, 
irrigation is under growing pressure to produce “more crops from 
fewer drops” and to reduce its negative environmental impacts, 
including soil salinization and nitrate contamination of drinking water. 
Greater use of water-saving precision technologies, such as drip and 
micro-irrigation, will make an important contribution to sustainable 
intensification.
Climate change poses grave risks to rainfed agricultural production. 
Scenarios indicate a decline of some 30
 pe
rcent or more in runoff from 
rainfall over large areas of sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Latin 
America by 2050. As water flows become more variable and uncertain, 
and the incidence of droughts and floods increases, crop yields are 
projected to decline in many developing countries
1. 
Nevertheless, a comprehensive assessment of water management in 
agriculture has found that the greatest potential for yield increases is 
in rainfed areas
2. But realizing that potential will require implementa-
tion of key “Save and Grow” recommendations: the use of improved, 
dr
ought-tolerant varieties, widespread adoption of conservation tillage, 
mulching and other soil improvement practices, the reversal of land 
degradation, and adding an irrigation component to rainfed cultivation 
through rainwater harvesting and supplemental irrigation
2.
Unlike most other food crops, cassava does not have a critical period 
during which adequate soil moisture is essential for flowering and 
seed production. It also has several defence mechanisms that help it 
to conserve water, and its roots can grow to great depths to access 
subsoil moisture reserves
3. As a result, cassava can withstand relatively 
prolonged periods of drought4.
However, the crop is very sensitive to soil water deficit during the 
first three months after planting. Stakes will only sprout and grow well 
when the temperature is above 15°C and the soil moisture content is 
at least 30
 pe
rcent of field capacity5. Water stress at any time in that 
52  Save and Grow: Cassava
early period reduces significantly the growth of roots and shoots, 
which impairs subsequent development of the storage roots, even if 
the drought stress is alleviated later
6, 7. 
Once established, cassava can grow in very dry areas – such as 
northeast Brazil – that receive just 400 mm o
f average annual rainfall3. 
In southern India, the crop’s water requirement is put at from 400 to 
750
 mm f
or a 300-day production cycle. But higher yields have been 
obtained with much higher levels of water supply. Research in Thailand 
found that maximum root yields were correlated with rainfall totalling 
about 1
 7
00 m
m during the 4th to 11th month after planting8. 
Cassava also responds well to irrigation. In trials in Nigeria, root 
yields increased sixfold when the quantity of water supplied by 
supplementary drip irrigation matched that of the season’s rainfall
9. 
However, cassava is also susceptible to excess water – if the soil 
becomes water-logged, sprouting and early growth is affected and 
yields fall. 
Rainfed production
I
n most parts of the world, cassava is almost exclusively a rainfed 
crop. Optimizing rainfed cassava production requires, therefore, 
careful attention to planting dates, the use of planting methods and 
planting positions that make the most of available soil moisture, and 
soil management practices that help to conserve water.
Cassava can be planted throughout the year if rainfall is evenly 
distributed, but not during periods of heavy rains or drought
10. In 
areas with only one rainy season per year, farmers usually plant as 
soon as the rains start – generally around April-May in the northern 
tropics and October-November in the southern tropics. A survey in 
Thailand in 1975 found that almost 50
 pe
rcent of the cassava crop was 
planted in the period April to June (Figure 13).
Once well-established, young plants will grow deeper roots as 
the topsoil begins to dry out with the arrival of the dry season. In 
Andhra Pradesh State, India, farmers plant cassava in well-watered 
nursery beds, before the onset of the 5-month rainy season, in order 
to induce sprouting and root development. When the rains start, the 
rooted stakes are transplanted to the field. If the early rains do not 
persist and some of the transplanted stakes die, they are replaced by 
Chapter 4: Water Management  53
newly sprouted stakes from the nursery 
beds. Using this approach, farmers can 
make optimum use of the short wet season 
without the need for irrigation.
In southern Nigeria, planting usually 
takes place between March and April, at 
the onset of the rainy season, although 
later planting – in June, at the peak of the 
rains, with harvesting 10
 mo
nths later 
during the long dry season – produces 
higher profit margins
11. Delaying planting 
beyond June in southern Nigeria can lead to 
drastic yield reductions, of up to 60
 pe
rcent 
(Figure 14)12.
In areas with two relatively short rainy 
seasons per year, cassava can be planted 
in the early or middle part of either rainy 
season and harvested after 10 to 14
 mo
nths, 
preferably during the dry season, when the root starch content is 
highest. In Kerala State, India, cassava is usually planted in April-May, 
with the start of the southwest monsoon, and in September-October, 
when the northeast monsoon arrives. However, some farmers plant 
short-duration cassava in lowland paddy fields in February, after the 
rice has been harvested, and the soil is still wet. The crop benefits from 
the remaining soil moisture during the dry months that follow, and 
is harvested after eight months, before the land is used again for rice.
Planting early in the rainy season will generally produce the highest 
yields because the plants have adequate soil moisture during the most 
critical part of their growth cycle. However, research has shown that 
yields can vary according to the variety used, the soil type, the plant’s 
age at harvest, and the rainfall intensity and distribution during any 
particular year.
In Thailand, planting in June produced average root yields of 
almost 40
 to
nnes per ha, compared to 27 to
nnes when planting was 
in September, the month with the heaviest rainfall, and 22 to
nnes in 
October, the beginning of the dry season (Figure 15)10. 
However, later research at the same location in Thailand, using 
four improved Rayong varieties, showed that the highest average yield 
was obtained by planting in August to November; planting either 
Planted area (%)
Rainfall (mm)
Source: Adapted from Sinthuprama, S. 1980. Cassava planting systems in Asia. In E.J. Weber, 
J.C. Toro and M. Graham (eds.). Cassava cultural practices. 
Proc. of a Workshop, held in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. March 18-21, 1980. pp. 50-53.
20
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
15
10
0
5
Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov
Figure 13 Rainfall and area of cassava planted  
each month in Thailand
120
100
80
60
40
0
20
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
Source: Annex Table 4.1
Month of planting
Figure 14 Effect of planting 
date on root yield of late 
season cassava, Nigeria (%)
54  Save and Grow: Cassava
early, in April-May, or late, in December-March, pro-
duced much lower yields. A more recent experiment 
co
nducted over three consecutive years produced a 
different result again. The highest root yields were 
obtained when cassava was planted in December, in 
the early dry season, and harvested after 11
 mo
nths, 
in November (Figure 16)8.
The explanation: in the location used for the trials, 
rain falls occasionally during the dry season and 
provides enough soil moisture to produce 90
 pe
rcent 
of the potential plant stand. Planting even later in the 
dry season, in February, resulted in lower root yields 
but higher starch content. By plotting root yield and 
starch content against rainfall during specific periods 
of the growth cycle, it was found that root yields were 
best correlated with total rainfall during the 4
th to 
11th month (March to October), while starch content 
was best correlated to rainfall during the 6 th to 9 th month (July to 
October), after planting8. 
Source: Annex Table 4.2
45
40
35
0
25
20
15
10
5
30
May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
* roots harvested at 8, 10, 12, 14, 16 and 18 months
Figure 15 Effects of time of planting on 
average cassava root yield*, Thailand (t/ha)
mm
1402 mm
Jun
1409 mm
Aug
1267 mm
Oct
1665 mm
Dec
1633 mm
Feb
1616 mm
Apr
30
25
0
15
5
20
10
Root yield
Starch yield
Total rainfall 
in 11-month period
Source: Annex Table 4.3
Month of planting with harvest after 11 months
Figure 16 Effect of different planting dates and average rainfall  
on cassava root and starch yield, Thailand  (t/ha)
Chapter 4: Water Management  55
Planting methods need to be tailored to soil moisture conditions 
under rainfed production. When the soil is not well drained and too 
wet owing to heavy rains, it is better to plant stakes on the top of 
ridges or mounds to keep the roots above the standing water. That 
will also reduce root rots. However, where cassava is planted during 
dry periods in Thailand, the rates of stake sprouting and plant survival 
are significantly higher when cassava stakes are planted on the flat, 
owing mainly to the slightly higher soil moisture content in the top 
30
 c
m of soil (Figure 17)13.
Similarly, stakes should be planted at a shallow depth, of 5 to 10 cm
, 
in heavy and wet soils, but slightly deeper in light-textured and dry 
soils to avoid surface heat and lack of moisture. In Thailand, planting 
stakes vertically or inclined at a 45
 de
gree angle produced signifi -
cantly higher yields and root starch contents than horizontal planting 
(F
igure 18
). The yield gap was even more pronounced when the stakes 
were planted early in the dry season and at shallow depths, because of 
hot, dry conditions close to the soil surface. With horizontal planting, 
sprouting was markedly delayed and the plant stand was reduced
13.
If the first rains are intense, the risk of waterlogging is greatest in 
shallow soils, and also in poorly drained soils where the subsoil has 
been compacted by heavy machinery. The risk of waterlogging can be 
reduced with zero tillage, which 
improves internal drainage (see 
Chapter 2, Farming systems). 
Where tillage is practised, soil 
should be prepared when it is 
not too dry or too wet – which 
reduces the number of plough-
ing and harrowing passes re -
quired – and, if necessary, a 
su
bsoiler can be used to break 
up the compacted layer. 
Sometimes, it may be better 
to delay planting to the latter 
part of the rainy season, but no 
later than about two months 
before the onset of the dry sea-
son. Planting towards the end, 
ra
ther than at the beginning, of 
the rainy season usually results 
Source: Annex Table 4.4
14
12
0
8
6
4
2
10
Rainy 
season 
(May-
August)
Early dry 
season 
(November)
Ridge 
planting
Flat 
planting
Figure 17 Effect of planting 
method on cassava plant 
survival in  rainy and dry 
season, Thailand (‘000/ha)
Source: Annex Table 4.4
20
18
16
0
12
10
8
6
4
2
14
Rainy season 
(May-August)
Early dry season 
(November)
Vertical
Inclined
Horizontal
Figure 18 Effect of stake planting 
position on cassava root yield in 
rainy and dry season, Thailand (t/ha)
56  Save and Grow: Cassava
Source:  Annex Table 4.5
45
40
0
30
25
20
15
10
5
35
Rainfed Full 
irrigation
* during drought periods 
(more than 7 days without rain)
Figure 19 Effect of 
supplemental irrigation* 
on  cassava root yield, 
India (t/ha)
Source: Annex Table 4.7
Zero 20 percent 50 percent 100 percent 
10
20
0
15
5
25
Irrigation water applied as percentage of effective rainfall
Figure 20 Effect of supplemental drip irrigation on cassava root yield, 
Nigeria (t/ha)
in lower yields, but it has some advantages: less weed competition 
and – if the crop is harvested in the off-season – the possibility of 
higher market prices. Another advantage is that the late planting of 
cassava does not coincide with other major agricultural activities, so 
there is less competition for labour.
Irrigated production
W
hen it is planted towards the end of the rainy season, or 
when the rainy season is very short, cassava benefits from 
supplemental irrigation during rainless periods. On land that is flat, 
or nearly flat, this can be done by flood or furrow irrigation, but on 
sloping land it may be more practical to use overhead sprinklers or a 
rotating water cannon. 
Research in India found that during periods of drought, yields 
increased with increasing amounts of surface irrigation water applied. 
Full irrigation, at 100
 pe
rcent of crop water requirements, doubled the 
root yield obtained without irrigation. It also increased slightly the 
With drip irrigation, 
researchers in Nigeria 
increased root yields from 
4.6 to 28 tonnes
starch content of roots and markedly reduced the hydrogen cyanide 
content (Figure 19)
14. 
More effective, in terms of water use efficiency, is drip irrigation 
which, by providing small and frequent water applications, saves water 
while maintaining soil moisture at a level that is highly favourable to 
crop growth (it also allows the farmer to water the cassava plants but 
not the weeds). In trials in the very dry zone of Tamil Nadu, India, 
drip irrigation of cassava produced about the same yields as those 
obtained with flood irrigation – around 60
 to
nnes per ha – using 
50 pe
rcent less water. When the water applied through drip irrigation 
was equal to that used in flood irrigation, yields continued to increase 
substantially, to 67.3
 t
onnes (Annex table 4.6)15. 
Similar results were reported from experiments in south-western 
Nigeria. With 730 mm o
f effective rainfall during the growing season, 
rainfed cassava produced root yields of less than 5 to
nnes per ha. In 
plots under supplemental drip irrigation, yields rose sharply with 
increasing levels of water applied. At 100
 pe
rcent of rainfall, drip 
irrigation produced yields of 28.1  to
nnes, equal to total water use 
efficiency of 18.8  kg p
er ha per  mm
, compared to 6.2  kg w
ithout 
irrigation (Figure 20). Yield increases at lower application rates were 
also significant – supplemental irrigation that boosted the total water 
supply by 20
 p
ercent almost doubled root yields9.
Chapter 4: Water Management  57

Chapter 5
Crop nutrition
Combining ecosystem processes  
and judicious use of mineral fertilizer 
forms the basis of a sustainable crop 
nutrition system that produces more 
while using fewer external inputs.

Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  61
T
o achieve the higher productivity needed to meet current 
and future demand, agriculture must, literally, return to 
its roots by rediscovering the importance of healthy soil, 
drawing on natural sources of crop nutrition and using 
mineral fertilizer wisely. 
The over-use of mineral fertilizer in agricultural production has 
carried significant costs to the environment, including the acidification 
of soil, the contamination of water, and increased emissions of potent 
greenhouse gases. More targeted and sparing use of fertilizer would 
save farmers money and help to ensure that nutrients reach crops and 
do not pollute air, soil and waterways. 
The impact of mineral fertilizer on the environment is a question of 
management: how much is applied compared to the amount exported 
with crops, and the method and timing of applications. In other 
words, it is the efficiency of fertilizer use, especially of nitrogen (N) 
and phosphorus (P), which determines if this aspect of soil fertility 
management is a boon for crops or a negative for the environment.
Experience indicates that higher and more sustainable yields are 
achieved when crop nutrients come from a mix of mineral fertilizer 
and organic sources, such as animal manure and trees and shrubs 
which, in dryer climates, can pump up from the subsoil nutrients that 
would otherwise never reach crops. Crop nutrition can be enhanced by 
other biological associations – for example, between plant roots and 
soil mycorrhizae. In “Save and Grow”, that combination of ecosystem 
processes and judicious use of mineral fertilizer forms the basis of a 
sustainable crop nutrition system that produces more while using 
fewer external inputs
1.
Cassava can grow and produce reasonable yields on soils where 
many other crops would fail. It is highly tolerant of soils with low levels 
of phosphorus and can generally grow even with no application of 
P-fertilizer. That is because cassava has formed a mutually beneficial 
association with a group of soil fungi called “vesicular-arbuscular 
mycorrhizae”
2, 3. Present in practically all natural soils, mycorrhizae 
penetrate the cassava root and feed on the sugars it produces.  In 
exchange, the fungi’s long filaments transport phosphorus and 
micronutrients to the root from a greater volume of the surrounding 
soil than the root alone could reach. That symbiotic association allows 
cassava to absorb sufficient phosphorus for healthy growth.  
62  Save and Grow: Cassava
Most of the nutrients absorbed by cassava during growth are found 
in the plant tops4. Returning stems and leaves to the soil – both as leaf 
litter and as mulch after the root harvest – enriches the soil with new 
organic matter, and some of the nutrients are re-used by the next crop 
(Figure 21). In fact, when the plant tops are recycled, fewer soil nutri-
ents are exported in the root harvest than in the harvest of most other 
cr
ops5, 6 – a root yield of 15 to nnes per ha removes only about 30 kg  
of nitrogen, 20 kg o
f potassium (K) and just 3.5 kg o
f phosphorus7-9. 
There is little danger of phosphorus depletion, therefore, even after 
many years of continuous cassava 
production on the same land
10. 
Cassava can also be grown on very 
acid and low-fertility soils because it 
tolerates low pH and the associated 
high levels of exchangeable alumin -
ium. While the yields of crops such 
as m
aize and rice are usually affected 
strongly when the soil pH is below 5 
and aluminium saturation is above 
50
 pe
rcent, cassava yields are normally 
not affected until the soil pH is below 
4.2 and aluminium saturation is above 
80
 pe
rcent. For that reason, cassava 
may not require large amounts of lime 
in acid soils, where other crops would 
not grow without them. 
Mineral fertilizer
I
ts ability to produce on low-fertility soils has given rise to the mis-
conception that cassava does not require, nor even respond to, the 
ap
plication of mineral fertilizer. In fact, the results of extensive trials 
reviewed by FAO have shown that many cassava varieties respond 
very well to fertilization
11. If anything, cassava’s need for fertilizer is 
increasing as traditional means of maintaining soil fertility – such as 
intercropping and the mulching of plant residues – are abandoned 
under more intensive production systems. 
100
90
80
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
70
N P K Ca Mg S B Cu Fe Mn Zn
RootsTops and fallen leaves
Source: Annex Table 5.1
Figure 21 Distribution of nutrients in 12-month-old 
unfertilized cassava, Colombia (%)
Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  63
50
45
40
35
30
25
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24    25
10
5
20
15
Fertilizer+tops recycled No fertilizer+tops recycled
Cassava crop cycles
No fertilizer, no tops recycled
Source: Howeler, R.H. 2012. Effect of cassava production on soil fertility and the long-term fertilizer requirements to maintain high yields.  
In R.H. Howeler, ed. The cassava handbook – A reference manual based on the Asian regional cassava training course, held in Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 411-428.
Figure 22 Effect of mineral fertilizer and crop residue management on cassava root yields 
over 25 crop cycles, Thailand (t/ha)
When root yields are high, and residues are not returned to the 
soil, the harvest removes large amounts of nitrogen and potassium. 
To sustain both yields and soil fertility, cassava would require annual 
per hectare applications estimated at 50 to 100
 kg 
of nitrogen, 65 to 
80 kg o
f potassium and 10 to 20 kg o
f phosphorus, depending on the 
soil’s native fertility and the desired yield levels. 
Results from 19  lo
ng-term fertility trials, conducted over 4 to 
36 ye
ars of continuous cassava cropping on the same plots, indicate 
that the main nutrient constraint was lack of K in 12 tr
ials, of N in five 
trials and of P in only two trials. In Thailand, high root yields of up to 
40
 to
nnes per ha were maintained when adequate amounts of mineral 
fertilizer (100 kg N + 2
2 kg P + 8
3 kg K
) were applied annually and 
plant foliage was returned to the soil before each new planting. When 
no fertilizer was applied and plant tops were removed from the field, 
per hectare yields declined sharply, from 30
 to
nnes in the first year to 
about 7 to
nnes after six years, owing to nutrient depletion, especially 
of potassium (Figure 22). Similar results have been witnessed on a 
wide range of different soils in Colombia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Thailand and Viet Nam
9.
Cassava yields in Africa could be increased markedly if farmers had 
access to mineral fertilizer at a reasonable price. In the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, the use of improved, pest- and disease-resistant 
varieties, in combination with appropriate rates of mineral fertilizer, 
64  Save and Grow: Cassava
led to increases in cassava root yields – of 30 to 160 pe rcent – as well 
as in stem yields, important for production of high quality plant -
ing material. In the west of the country, per hectare cassava yields 
in
creased from 12 to 25 to
nnes with moderate applications of N-P-K 
fertilizer, and reached more than 40 to
nnes with higher application 
rates12. (However, fertilizer costs in sub-Saharan Africa remain high. 
Where using fertilizer on cassava is not economical, the crop may 
benefit from the residues of fertilizer applied to other crops of higher 
economic value, such as maize and soybean
13.)
Initially, cassava should be fertilized with equal amounts of N, 
phosphorus pentoxide (P
2O5) and potassium oxide (K2O) at a rate of 
500 kg t
o 800 kg p
er ha of a compound fertilizer such as 15-15-15 or 
16-16-16. However, if the crop is grown continuously for many years 
on the same land, the N-P-K balance will need to be modified to 
compensate for the corresponding removal of each nutrient in the root 
harvest. That can be done by using fertilizers with a ratio of N, P
2O5 
and K2O of about 2:1:3, such as 15-7-20, or any compound fertilizer that 
is high in K and N, and relatively low in P. Farmers should follow local 
fertilizer recommendations based on experimental results obtained 
with the crop or on the results of simple fertilizer trials conducted in 
their own fields with the help of an agronomist or extension worker.
Soluble fertilizers – such as urea, single- and triple-superphosphate, 
di-ammonium phosphate, potassium chloride and potassium sulphate 
– and most compound fertilizers should be applied either when the 
stakes are planted or, preferably, about one month later, when the 
roots have emerged. Phosphorus should be applied at or shortly after 
planting. N and K are best applied in split doses, one half at or shortly 
after planting, and the rest at 2 to 3
 mo
nths after planting, when 
cassava reaches its maximum growth rate. 
Most mineral fertilizers dissolve rather rapidly in soil water. They 
should be applied in short bands, dug with a hoe, 20-30 cm l
ong and 
4-5 c
m deep at a distance of about 5-10 c
m from the cassava stake or 
plant. After application, the fertilizers should be covered with soil to 
prevent volatilization of N and losses of nutrients through runoff and 
erosion. The roots of the plant will grow towards the fertilizer band in 
order to take up the nutrients dissolved in the soil solution. Localized 
application helps to avoid fertilizing weeds that may grow nearby. 
Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  65
To reduce economically wasteful and environmentally harmful 
losses of fertilizer nutrients, “Save and Grow” farming systems seek 
to maximize fertilizer use efficiency. Trials in India have shown 
how the supply of nitrogen fertilizer to cassava can be optimized by 
using urea compressed into supergranules or urea prills coated with 
cake made from neem seed oil (Figure 23)
14. Both technologies slow 
considerably the nitrification of the urea, reducing losses to the air 
and to surface water runoff, and ensuring a continuous supply of 
nitrogen to match the requirements of the crop at different stages of 
growth. In trials, the neem-coated urea produced average root yield 
increases of 27
 p
ercent15. 
Less soluble fertilizers, such as rock phosphate, lime, gypsum, 
sulphur and organic compost and manure, are usually broadcast over 
the entire field and incorporated before planting, in order to achieve 
good contact with the soil and enhance the rate at which they dissolve 
or decompose. In reduced or zero tillage systems, they should be 
applied at the bottom of the planting holes at the time of planting.
 
30
25
20
0
5
10
15
Urea Neem-coated 
urea
Urea 
super granules
Rubber  
cake-coated 
urea
Source: Annex Table 5.2
Figure 23 Effect of four sources of nitrogen on cassava root yield,  
India (t/ha)
66  Save and Grow: Cassava
Organic sources of nutrients
W
hile mineral fertilizer can help to boost yields, alone it cannot 
sustain crop production in the long-term on degraded land16. 
Farmers need to maintain and improve soil quality and health using 
a number of other “Save and Grow” measures, such as conservation 
tillage, intercropping, green manuring, mulching crop residues and 
cover crops, alley cropping, and applying animal manure or compost 
(see also Chapter 2, Farming systems).
Intercropping with grain legumes, which fix atmospheric nitrogen, 
make some N available to the cassava crop. Although biological fixa-
tion cannot meet all of cassava’s nitrogen needs, it has some benefits. In 
Ni
geria, after two years of cassava-soybean intercropping, incorpora-
tion of soybean residues led to yield increases of 10 to 23 percent17.
Research at two locations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
found that planting four rows of groundnuts between widely spaced 
rows of cassava also boosted root yields. But higher yields still were 
obtained in both locations with the application of 17-17-17 compound 
fertilizer at the rate of 150
 kg p
er ha, divided evenly between the 
cassava and the intercrop. 
The fertilizer treatment 
produced the highest net 
benefits in one location 
during the first year, while 
intercropping with ground-
nuts and without fertilizer 
pr
oduced the highest net 
benefit in the second year. 
Despite its high price in the 
region, mineral fertilizer 
was the treatment most 
preferred by farmers
19. 
Alley cropping with deep-
rooting and fast-growing 
leguminous trees may be an 
effective means of improv-
ing soil fertility and yields, 
wh
ere mineral fertilizer is 
Fast-growing groundnuts 
protect soil from erosion 
and provide cassava with 
a source of nitrogen
In Viet Nam, alley 
cropping with the 
leguminous tree 
Leucaena leucocephala 
(at right) increased 
yields – but it may not be 
as effective in the humid 
tropics

Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  67
not available. In a long-term soil improve -
ment experiment in southern Viet  Na m, alley 
cropping with two leguminous tree species, 
Leucaena leucocephala and Gliricidia sepium, 
had a marked and consistent long-term benefi-
cial effect on cassava grown in alleys 4
 m wi de, 
both when cassava was fertilized and when 
it was not fertilized. During the 16
th year of 
continuous cropping on the same plots, fertil-
izer application alone boosted root yields from 
4.
8 to
nnes to 17.4  to
nnes per ha, while alley 
cropping with Leucaena and without fertilizer 
increased yields to 13.4
 to
nnes. Combining 
Leucaena with fertilizer achieved yields of more 
than 20
 t
onnes (Figure 24).
However, the benefit of alley cropping is lim-
ited in the humid tropics, which are dominated 
by l
arge areas of low-fertility ferralsols. The alley cropping of trees in 
such areas does not automatically lead to higher cassava yields – a 
review of experiments in the humid zone of West and Central Africa 
revealed that, in the majority of trials, it had either no effect or a 
negative effect on cassava root growth
19. Those results were probably 
due to the fact that, in more humid climates, the tree roots tend to 
remain in the upper levels of the soil, where they compete strongly 
with cassava.
Green manuring – the practice of growing a grain- or forage legume 
for some months, then mulching the residues prior to planting the 
cassava crop – also improves soil fertility, especially levels of nitrogen. 
Combinations of cassava with legumes have a definite biological 
advantage over monocropping because the area by time occupancy of 
the land is higher. That biological advantage decreases, however, with 
the duration of the legume crop, which should not exceed 90
 d
ays20.
Many green manure species have been tested, both in Colombia and 
Thailand, to measure their effect on cassava21. Green manures used 
in Colombia include native weeds, cowpeas, groundnuts, pigeon peas, 
velvet beans (Mucuna pruriens), jack-beans (Canavalia ensiformis), the 
perennial forage legume Zornia latifolia and tropical kudzu (Pueraria 
phaseoloides). The grain legumes were harvested after four months 
and the forages were cut after six months, before being incorporated 
Source: Annex Table 5.3
25
20
15
0
5
10
Monoculture Cassava+
Leucaena
Cassava+ 
Gliricidia
fertilized unfertilized
Figure 24 Effect of alley crops on cassava root yield, 
Viet Nam (t/ha)
68  Save and Grow: Cassava
into the soil. Cassava was planted one month afterward, in plots with 
and without mineral fertilizer. 
Although root production increased most markedly with the ap-
plication of fertilizer, incorporation of green manures helped to boost 
yi
elds when no fertilizer was applied. Groundnuts were among the 
most beneficial green manure crops, but Zornia latifolia and kudzu 
were also very effective, especially in the presence of fertilizers. 
On very sandy soils in Colombia, the mulching of native weeds – 
tall grasses and creeping legumes – proved to be the best method of 
fertilization, in the absence of mineral fertilizer. The application of 3 
to 4
 to
nnes of dry mulch per ha led to yield increases similar to those 
produced by the application of 500 kg 
of 15-15-15 mineral fertilizer21, 2 2 . 
Trials conducted in Thailand showed that several green manures, 
especially sunn hemp ( Crotalaria juncea), also increased cassava 
yields
21. 
Another approach is to plant the green manure at the same time 
as the cassava, but in between the cassava rows, similar to an inter -
crop. The fast-growing green manures are pulled out 2 or 3 months 
af
ter planting, and mulched between the rows. The manure crops 
Canavalia ensiformis and Crotalaria juncea have proven particularly 
effective in increasing cassava root yields. 
Material for organic soil cover can also be collected off-site. Some 
species, such as Tithonia diversifolia, a wild sunflower found growing 
along roadsides throughout the tropics, make high-quality mulch. 
Tithonia is particularly high in N and K, although its nutrient content 
varies according to where it grows. In East Africa, the usual practice 
is to cut and chop leaves and soft twigs into small pieces, before the 
plant flowers, and spread them evenly over the soil surface
23.
At two sites in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kiduma and 
Mbuela, incorporating into the soil 2.5 to
nnes per ha of dry matter of 
Tithonia diversifolia and Chromolaena odorata before cassava was 
planted produced very marked increases in yields, similar to those 
obtained with the application of low to moderate levels of N-P-K 
compound fertilizers
24. When they were applied in combination 
with low or moderate levels of fertilizer, cassava yields increased even 
beyond those obtained with higher fertilizer rates. 
Tithonia was more effective in increasing cassava yields than 
Chromolaena in Kiduma, but not in Mbuela, owing to the much lower 
nutrient content of Tithonia collected at the latter site. Application of 
mineral fertilizer at low, moderate and high levels increased cassava 
Tithonia diversifolia, a 
wild sunflower found 
throughout the tropics, 
makes nutrient-rich, 
high-quality mulch

Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  69
yields significantly at both sites, and fertilizer 
residues remaining in the soil benefited the 
following cassava crop (Figure 25).
Despite the high cost of fertilizer, the 
net economic benefits increased with fer -
tilizer application, up to the highest rate 
in K
iduma and up to a moderate rate in 
Mbuela. However, the cost-benefit ratio 
and marginal rate of return were highest for 
Tithonia. In areas where mineral fertilizer 
is not available or is too costly, therefore, 
cassava yields can be markedly improved 
by incorporating locally available vegetation, 
such as Tithonia or Chromolaena.
However, they may not always be avail -
able, and are cumbersome to collect and 
tr
ansport at the high rates of application 
used in the Congolese experiments. In ad -
dition, Tithonia c an easily become a weed in the field where it has 
been applied as green manure, and Chromolaena odorata is a favoured 
breeding site of the African grasshopper Zonocerus variegatus, a major 
pest of cassava in West Africa. 
So, while green manure can definitely play an important role in 
maintaining soil fertility and improving cassava yields, the practice and 
the green manure species selected need to be adapted to the conditions 
of the growing area. Since cassava has a long growth cycle, farmers 
may be reluctant to use part of that year for green manure production. 
In many cases, they will prefer to invest in mineral fertilizer.
Animal manure and compost are used by smallholder farmers around 
the world to increase crop production. Among the various types, 
chicken manure tends to have the highest nutrient content. Manure 
and compost are both good sources of organic matter which, when 
incorporated into the soil, improve its structure and aggregate stability, 
and enhance water holding and cation exchange capacity. They also 
facilitate the below-ground biological activity of earthworms, bacteria 
and fungi, and supply a wide range of nutrients, including secondary 
and micro-nutrients.
An IITA-led research programme on agricultural development 
in the humid tropics is investigating the potential benefits to soil 
Source: Annex Table 5.4
45
40
35
0
25
20
15
10
5
30
No treatment Fertilizer
(1 417 kg/ha) 
Fertilizer 
(850 kg/ha)
+Tithonia  
Kiduma
Mbuela
Figure 25 Effect of mineral fertilizer and green manure 
on cassava root yield at two sites in DR Congo (t/ha)
70  Save and Grow: Cassava
fertility of livestock integra -
tion with cassava production. 
Li
vestock integration will add 
value to green manure species 
and cassava leaves when they are 
used as feed, which in turn will 
increase returns of animal ma -
nure to fields and crop yields
16.
Trials indicate that combining 
about 3 to 5  to
nnes of manure 
or compost per ha with mineral 
fertilizer that contains the right 
balance of N, P and K is often the 
most effective means of increas-
ing yields and maintaining the 
so
il’s productive capacity. The 
fertilizers supply the bulk of the 
macro-nutrients needed by the 
plants, while the organic sources provide secondary and micro-
nutrients – which are only needed in very small quantities – and 
improve the soil’s physical condition. 
In trials in Indonesia and Viet Nam, a combination of compost or 
farmyard manure – five
 to
nnes per ha in both cases – with judicious 
selection and use of mineral fertilizers – nitrogen and potassium in 
Viet
 Na
m (Annex table 5.5), and only nitrogen in Indonesia (Figure 
26) – produced high crop yields and the highest net income.
The main drawback to organic sources of nutrients is that they 
contain relatively low levels of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium – it 
takes one
 to
nne of animal manure or compost to supply the same 
amount of the major nutrients as 50  kg o
f a compound fertilizer 
(Annex table 5.7). For small-scale farmers in isolated rural areas, 
the lack of roads, transport and on-farm machinery may make the 
collection and application of several
 to
nnes of manure or compost 
cumbersome and expensive, if not impossible. 
Source: Annex Table 5.6
45
40
35
0
25
20
15
10
5
30
No 
treatment
Nitrogen 
(135 kg/ha)
Manure 
(10 t/ha)
Compost 
(10 t/ha)
Nitrogen 
(135 kg/ha) 
+manure 
(5 t/ha)
Nitrogen 
(135 kg/ha)
+compost 
(5 t/ha)
Figure 26 Effect of mineral and organic fertilizers on cassava fresh 
root yield, Indonesia  (t/ha)
Chapter 5: Crop Nutrition  71
Controlling soil erosion
B
ecause the topmost soil layer is the most fertile, control of soil 
erosion is essential for sustainable soil fertility management. 
Removal of topsoil causes the loss not only of available or exchange-
able nutrients, but the total amounts of nutrients in the organic and 
mi
neral fraction25. 
Growing cassava tends to cause more soil losses to erosion than 
growing most other crops, especially where farmers do not use cover 
crops or mulches to protect the 
soil from the direct impact of rain, 
sun and wind during the first 2 to 
3
 mo
nths of growth 10. In addition, 
cassava is often grown on sandy or 
sandy-loam soils that have low ag -
gregate stability, and on slopes that 
ar
e already eroded, partly because 
cassava is one of few crops that can 
produce reasonably well on exposed 
subsoils. 
 “Save and Grow” practices can 
reduce runoff and erosion signifi -
cantly, while helping to increase 
ca
ssava yields. One option is mini -
mum or zero tillage (see Chapter 2, 
Farming systems )
, which protects 
the soil from erosion, slows the 
decomposition of organic matter and maintains soil aggregate stability 
and internal drainage. A study in Colombia found that a combination 
of minimum tillage and grass-legume mixtures in rotation enhanced 
microbial soil activity, which resulted in significant binding of soil 
particles, thereby increasing aggregation and reducing soil erosion
26. 
Zero tillage is most effective in a well-aggregated soil with an adequate 
level of organic matter. 
If the land is prepared using conventional tillage, ploughing and 
ridging on slopes needs to be done along the contour, rather than up-
and-down the slope, and contours should be planted with hedgerows 
of grasses or shrub- or tree-legumes in order to slow runoff and trap 
eroded sediments. Cassava stakes should be planted through mulch 
(such as crop residues, grasses or leguminous tree prunings), and 
intercrops should be grown as a soil cover between the cassava rows. 
60
Source: Annex Table 5.8
160
140
120
100
80
0
20
40
Fertilizer 
only
Fertilizer 
+paspalum 
hedgerows
Fertilizer 
+closer 
spacing
No 
fertilizer or 
hedgerows
Relative cassava yield Relative dry soil loss
Figure 27 Effect of soil conservation practices on cassava root 
yield and dry soil loss due to erosion, Viet Nam (%)
72  Save and Grow: Cassava
Studies in Colombia and in several Asian countries have shown that 
among the practices most effective in controlling erosion are: planting 
contour hedgerows of vetiver grass, Tephrosia candida or Paspalum 
atratum; planting cassava on contour ridges; and planting Leucaena 
leucocephala or Gliricidia sepium along the contour in alley cropping 
systems (Figure 27). The benefit of all of those measures is enhanced 
by applying mineral fertilizer to the cassava, because it leads to faster 
soil coverage by the plant canopy.
Most erosion control practices have advantages and disadvantages, 
and trade-offs need to be made. It is important to involve farmers 
directly in testing and selecting the practices most suited to their soil 
and climate, their socio-economic conditions and their traditions. 
Chapter 6
Pests and diseases
Protecting cassava with pesticide  
is usually ineffective and hardly ever 
economic. A range of non-chemical 
measures can help farmers reduce losses 
while protecting the agro-ecosystem.

Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  75
T
he first line of defence against crop pests and diseases is 
a healthy agro-ecosystem. Because synthetic insecticide, 
fungicide and herbicide disrupt the natural crop ecosystem 
balance, “Save and Grow” seeks to minimize their use to the 
extent possible. It promotes instead integrated pest management (or 
IPM), a crop protection strategy that aims at enhancing the biological 
processes and crop-associated biodiversity that underpin production
1. 
Crop losses to insects are kept to an acceptable minimum by 
deploying resistant varieties, conserving and encouraging biological 
control agents, and managing crop nutrient levels to reduce insect 
reproduction. Diseases are controlled through the use of clean planting 
material, crop rotations to suppress pathogens, and elimination of 
infected host plants. Effective weed management entails timely manual 
weeding and the use of surface mulches to suppress weed growth. 
When necessary, low-risk selective pesticides may be used for 
targeted control, in the right quantity and at the right time. Since all 
pesticides are potentially toxic to people and the environment, the 
products employed must be locally registered and approved, and carry 
clear instructions on their safe handling and use. 
Like all major crops, cassava is vulnerable to pests and diseases that 
can cause heavy yield losses. Their impact is most serious in Africa. 
Until recently, Asia had few serious pest and disease problems, but 
this may be changing as the crop is grown more intensively over larger 
areas and planted throughout the year for industrial processing.
When pest or disease management measures become necessary, 
a strategy of non-chemical control should be considered before any 
decision is taken to use pesticide. Since cassava is a long-season crop, 
and exposed to pests and diseases for an extended period, pesticide is 
usually ineffective and hardly ever economic. That is why insecticide, 
for example, should be used only in short-term, localized applications 
in “hot spots” where the pest is first observed, and only when the pest 
is in its early stage of development. 
A range of non-chemical measures can help farmers reduce losses 
to pests and diseases while protecting the agro-ecosystem
2-7. First, 
planting material should be of varieties with tolerance or resistance 
to the most important cassava diseases and pests, and taken from 
mother plants that are free of disease symptoms and signs of pest at-
tacks. As an extra precaution, stakes can be soaked in hot water to kill 
pe
sts or disease-causing organisms that might be present. In extreme 
76  Save and Grow: Cassava
cases, soaking stakes in a solution of fungicide and insecticide may be 
necessary. However, farmers who do so must have received training 
in the correct use of pesticide and, in selecting chemicals, should 
follow the recommendations of local plant protection specialists. 
Ecosystem-based practices, such as mulching, planting hedges and 
intercropping, can provide refuges for natural enemies of insect pests. 
Building up soil organic matter increases pest-regulating populations 
early in the cropping cycle. 
During crop growth, applying adequate amounts of mineral fertil-
izer or manure to the crop can enhance its resistance or tolerance. 
In
secticide should not be applied to the leaves of the growing cassava 
plant, as it may kill natural biological control agents that help to 
keep some major pests and diseases under control. For example, 
insecticide kills cassava mites’ natural enemies – phytoseiid mite 
predators – before killing the mites themselves. When natural preda-
tors are eliminated, the result is an increase in the pest population, to 
wh
ich farmers may respond with increased use of pesticide, thereby 
perpetuating and worsening the cycle of pest damage. Biopesticides, 
such as extract of neem seed oil, are recommended for controlling 
whiteflies, mealybugs and variegated grasshoppers. Whitefly and 
mealybug numbers can also be reduced with sticky traps and by 
spraying plants with soapy water. 
Control of major cassava diseases
A
lthough the largest number of cassava diseases is found in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, the plant’s centre of origin, many 
of them are now also found in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. Some 
have evolved separately in Africa and Asia, and have not yet arrived 
in the Americas. 
Bacterial blight is one of the most widespread and serious of the 
cassava diseases. Caused by the proteobacterium Xanthomonas 
axonopodis pv. manihotis, it is transmitted mainly by infected planting 
material or infected farm tools. It can also be spread from one plant to 
another by rain splash, and by the movement of people, machines or 
animals from infected fields to healthy fields. The bacterium infects 
first the leaves, which turn brown in large patches and eventually 
Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  77
die, then the vascular tissues of the petioles and 
woody stems. 
The effect of bacterial blight on yields varies 
according to factors such as location, variety, 
weather patterns, planting time and the quality 
of planting material. In 1974, the disease caused 
losses of 50
 pe
rcent in large plantations in Brazil. 
Bacterial blight can also threaten food security by 
reducing the production of cassava leaves, which 
are an important source of vegetable protein in 
Central Africa. 
Although potentially devastating, bacterial blight 
can be controlled effectively with “Save and Grow” 
practices. They include:
 Use varieties with good tolerance (many tolerant, 
h
igh-yielding varieties are now available)
 Use healthy planting material from disease-free plants or plants 
d
erived from meristem culture, rooted buds or shoots
 Before planting, treat stakes by soaking them in hot water at 50°C 
f
or about 50 mi
nutes. In extreme cases, and on the advice of local 
plant protection specialists, stakes may be soaked for 10  mi
nutes 
in a solution of cupric fungicides 
 Plant at the end of rainy periods
 After using tools in blight-infected plots, sterilize them in hot water 
o
r in a dilute solution of a disinfectant, such as sodium hypochlorite
 Ensure that the plants are adequately fertilized, especially with 
po
tassium
 Uproot and burn any diseased plants and infected crop residues
 Intercrop cassava with other species to reduce plant-to-plant dis-
s
emination of bacterial blight caused by rain-splash (fast growing 
cro
ps such as maize will also reduce dissemination by wind)
 To prevent the carry-over of the disease in the soil, rotate cassava 
w
ith other crops, or leave the field in fallow for at least six months 
between cassava crops.
Viral diseases are usually transmitted through the use of infected 
planting material. In addition, whiteflies – mainly of the species 
Bemisia tabaci – are vectors for viruses that cause cassava mosaic 
disease (CMD) and cassava brown streak disease (CBSD). 
Misshapen leaves, lack 
of chlorophyll, mottling 
and wilting: symptoms of 
cassava mosaic disease  
78  Save and Grow: Cassava
Cassava mosaic disease is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa. Common 
symptoms include misshapen leaves, chlorosis, mottling and mosaic. 
Plants suffer stunting and general decline, and the more severe the 
symptoms, the lower the root yield. In the mid-1990s, an unusually 
severe form of CMD caused yield losses of 80 to 100
 pe
rcent in parts 
of Kenya and Uganda. CMD is also the most serious cassava disease in 
India and Sri Lanka, where it can lead to root losses of up to 90
 pe
rcent 
in traditional varieties8. 
Cassava brown streak disease causes corky necrosis in roots that 
renders them unfit for consumption. The disease has been responsible 
for total crop failures in parts of Africa’s Great Lakes region. In 2011, 
FAO warned that none of the cassava varieties grown by farmers in 
the region seemed to be resistant to CBSD. Even plants produced 
from clean planting material can become infected through the 
transmission of the virus by B. tabaci whiteflies from infected plants 
in neighbouring plots. Because the symptoms of CBSD may not be 
evident on the cassava leaves or stems, farmers may not be aware 
that their crops are infected until they harvest the roots. The lack of 
above-ground symptoms makes the use of disease-infected planting 
material more likely. 
Two key recommendations for control of both CMD and CBSD 
are strict enforcement of quarantine procedures during international 
exchange of cassava germplasm, and cultural practices, especially the 
use of resistant or tolerant cultivars and virus-free planting material.
A major effort has been made to produce and distribute CMD- and 
CBSD-free planting material in the Great Lakes region. January 2012 
saw the release in the United Republic of Tanzania of four high-
yielding cassava varieties, bred through marker-assisted selection, 
that are resistant to CMD and tolerant to CBSD. 
A decade of intensive research at Kerala’s Central Tuber Crops 
Research Institute identified a Nigerian variety and the wild species, 
Manihot caerulescens, as resistant to both the Indian and Sri Lankan 
mosaic viruses. Researchers have used those two donor parents and 
crossed them with high-yielding local varieties to produce several 
promising lines resistant to CMD, one of which has become popular 
in the industrial cassava belts of Tamil Nadu
9.
Root rots occur mainly in poorly drained soils during very intense 
rainy periods, and are common in Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
They are caused by a wide range of fungal and bacterial pathogens, 
Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  79
and lead to loss of leaves, dieback in stems and shoots, and root 
deterioration, either as the crop grows or during post-harvest storage. 
Farm tools and plant residues left in fields post-harvest are often 
contaminated with disease-causing fungi and are sources of spores 
that infect new plants. 
In trials in Colombia’s Amazon region, smallholder farmers 
eliminated cassava root rot using simple “Save and Grow” practices. 
They planted stakes taken only from healthy mother plants, used a 
mixture of ashes and dry leaves as a soil amendment and fertilizer 
during planting, and intercropped cassava with cowpeas
3. Other 
cultural practices that control root rots include:
 If no disease-free planting material is available, immerse stakes in 
h
ot water for around 50 m
inutes 
 Plant on light-textured, moderately deep soils with good internal 
d
rainage
 Improve drainage by reducing tillage and using surface mulches 
 Rotate cassava with cereals or grasses
 Uproot and burn diseased plants
A
n effective biological control for root rot is immersion of the 
stakes in a suspension of Trichoderma viride, a fast-growing species 
of soil fungus that parasitizes the vegetative tissue of other soil-borne 
fungi
3, 10. In experiments in Nigeria, two groups of stored cassava 
roots were inoculated with four pathogenic fungi. One group was also 
inoculated with a culture filtrate of T. viride. Over a period of three 
weeks, the group without T. viride suffered an incidence of rot ranging 
from 20 to 44
 pe
rcent; in the group inoculated with the biocontrol 
agent, there was a drastic reduction in the range and number of the 
target fungi, with the incidence of rot ranging from zero to 3
 pe
rcent 
after three weeks. Inoculation with T. viride rendered unnecessary 
repeated spraying with synthetic fungicide
11. 
Control of major insect pests
A
round 200 spe cies of arthropod pests have been reported on 
cassava. Of these, some are specific to the crop, while others 
attack other crops as well. The greatest diversity of cassava insect 
pests is found in Latin America, where they have co-evolved with the 
crop. However, cassava pest problems are not necessarily more serious 
80  Save and Grow: Cassava
in Latin America – many harmful insects are kept under control by 
predators and parasitoids, which have co-evolved over the centuries4, 5.
Whiteflies feed directly on young cassava leaves and are also a virus 
vector, making them probably the most damaging insect pest in all 
cassava-producing regions. In Latin America, 11
 wh
itefly species have 
been reported on cassava, including Aleurotrachelus socialis, A. aepim 
and Trialeurodes variabilis, which cause most damage. The whitefly 
Bemisia tabaci, the vector of cassava mosaic disease and cassava 
brown streak disease, is found in most of sub-Saharan Africa and 
now in India. It is also present in Latin America, but does not feed on 
cassava. Another species, Aleurodicus disperses, or spiralling whitefly, 
is found in India, Lao PDR and Thailand, as well as in Africa, and can 
cause serious damage and yield losses. 
Although many farmers use insecticides to control whitefly 
infestations, spraying is usually ineffective – A. socialis whiteflies, for 
example, double their numbers in less than five days. Not spraying in-
secticide, on the other hand, allows biological control by the whitefly’s 
na
tural enemies, which include many 
species of parasitoids, predators and 
entomopathogens.
A two-year experiment in Cameroon 
found that intercropping cassava with 
maize and cowpeas was associated 
with a drop of 50
 pe
rcent in the adult 
whitefly population and a 20  pe
rcent 
reduction in the incidence of cassava 
mosaic disease (Figure 28)
12. Research 
in Colombia suggests that intercrop -
ping with cowpeas depresses cassava 
le
af growth, making the plant less ap-
petizing to whiteflies. Less vigorous 
gr
owth did not affect root yields – in 
fact, yield losses were only 13 pe
rcent in 
the cassava/cowpea system, but as high 
as 65
 p
ercent in the monoculture13. 
Other recommended control mea-
sures include imposing a “closed sea -
son”, when no cassava can be present in 
th
e field, in order to break the whitefly’s 
Bemisia tabaci transmits 
serious viral diseases to 
cassava plants
Cassava
Cassava
+maize
+cowpea
Source: Adapted from Fondong, V.N., Thresh, J.M. & Zok, S. 2002. Spatial and temporal spread 
of cassava mosaic virus disease in cassava grown alone and when intercropped with maize and/or cowpea. 
J. Phytopathology, 150: 365-374.
40
30
64 8 10 12 14 16
10
0
20
Weeks after planting
Figure 28 Mean number of adult whiteflies  
on cassava leaves, Cameroon
Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  81
Mealybugs have 
devastated cassava fields 
in sub-Saharan Africa 
and Thailand
Natural enemy of cassava 
mealybugs – the tiny 
wasp Anagyrus lopezi 
development cycle (although, this may not be as effective with some 
species, such as B. tabaci, that have multiple hosts). Recent trials in 
Colombia indicate that planting different cassava varieties in the same 
field may reduce herbivore load and increase yields in zones subject 
to heavy T. variabilis attacks
14. 
Mealybugs feed on cassava stems, petioles and leaves, and inject a 
toxin that causes leaf curling, slow shoot growth and eventual leaf 
withering. Yield loss in infested plants can be up to 60
 pe
rcent of the 
roots and 100 pe
rcent of the leaves. Of the approximately 15 sp
ecies 
of mealybug that attack cassava plants, two – Phenacoccus herrini 
and P. manihoti – cause major damage to cassava in Latin America. 
In the early 1970s, P. manihoti was accidentally introduced into 
sub-Saharan Africa, where it had no natural enemies, and spread 
rapidly throughout the region’s cassava growing areas. The mealybug 
population was brought under control by the introduction of several 
natural enemies from South America. The most effective predator 
was Anagyrus lopezi, a tiny wasp: the female wasp lays its eggs in the 
mealybug and the growing larvae kill their host. 
P. manihoti was recently introduced inadvertently into Thailand 
and within a year it had spread throughout the country. At its peak, in 
May 2009, it affected 230
 00
0 ha o
f Thai cassava-growing land. The 
outbreak devastated the 2010 cassava harvest, which fell to 22.7 mi
l-
lion tonnes, from a record of 30 million tonnes the year before. 
Ho
w Thai authorities and farmers responded to the 2009 mealybug 
outbreak provides an excellent example of the effectiveness of biologi-
cal pest control. To avoid new outbreaks, farmers were advised not 
to p
lant cassava in the late rainy season and early dry season, and to 
soak stakes in an insecticide solution before planting. They were also 
warned to avoid spraying insecticides on the plants themselves – 
experience had shown that spraying provoked the pest’s resurgence. 
To control outbreaks, researchers identified several native predators 
and parasites but concluded they were unable to effectively reduce the 
mealybug population. They suggested the use of Anagyrus lopezi, the 
wasp that had successfully controlled the mealybug in Africa in the 
1970s. In September 2009, some 500
 ad
ults of A. lopezi were hand-
carried to Bangkok from IITA’s Biological Control Centre in Benin. 
After quarantine laboratory tests and field trials, the government 
began large-scale multiplication and distribution of the wasp. By May 
2012, almost 3
 mi
llion pairs of A. lopezi had been released throughout 
82  Save and Grow: Cassava
Source: Rojanaridpiched, C., Thongnak, N., Jeerapong, L. & Winotai, A. 2012. Rapid response to the accidental introduction of the mealybug, Phenacoccus manihoti, in Thailand. 
Factsheet prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
250
200
150
0
50
100
2009 2010 2011 2012
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
14 May
8 Dec
15 Jan
Anagyrus wasp imported from Benin
Wasp undergoes trials
Wasp released in 25 villages
Wasp released nationwide
24 Dec
18 Jan
9 Dec
15 Jan
30 Jul
Figure 29 Area infested by cassava mealybug in Thailand, 2009-2012 (‘000 ha)
the infested cassava area. The biological control campaign was highly 
successful – the infested area was reduced to 170 00
0 ha i
n 2010, to 
64 0
00 h
a in 2011 and just 3 3
00 h
a in 2012 (Figure 29)15. 
Current recommendations for the control of cassava mealybugs 
include:
 Conserve the population of natural enemies by not spraying 
s
ynthetic pesticide
 If necessary, treat planting material with a solution using a locally 
r
egistered and recommended insecticide
 Monitor cassava plantations every 2 to 4 we eks to detect focal points 
of infestation
 Remove and burn the infested parts of plants
 Avoid the movement of planting material from one region to another
 Minimize the movement of planting material from infested to 
n
on-infested fields
Cassava mites are an important insect pest in all producing regions. 
The cassava green mite, Mononychellus tanajoa, causes the most 
damage to cassava in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa, especially 
Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  83
Other natural enemies 
of insect pests worth 
protecting: Coccinellidae 
beetles (top) and the 
African lacewing
in lowland areas with a prolonged dry season. It feeds on the underside 
of young leaves, which become white-yellow, deformed and smaller. 
The mite can cause root yield losses of up to 80
 pe
rcent. Another 
green mite species, M. mcgregori, was recently reported in Cambodia, 
China and Viet Nam. Although it may not be as aggressive as M. 
tanajoa, it could cause serious damage owing to the lack of primary 
natural enemies. 
The introduction of green mites on cassava imported from Latin 
America in the early 1970s devastated Africa’s cassava production. To 
bring the mite under control, entomologists at IITA and CIAT first 
identified its area of origin in South America and its natural enemy, 
another mite, from Brazil. The Brazilian mites survived in Africa but 
their diffusion was very slow. 
The solution was another predatory mite, Tetranychus aripo, which 
spread rapidly in African farmer’s fields and did not have a voracious 
appetite for green mites – an advantage, since it allows enough green 
mites to survive and prevent the predatory mites from dying out. As 
well as reducing the damage caused by green mites throughout Africa, 
T. aripo has contributed substantially to the science of biological 
control and to the knowledge of how mites work in complex food 
systems
16.
Many species of red spider mites have been observed on cassava 
in all three cassava-producing regions. It is the most prevalent dry 
season pest of cassava in Asia, where the most common species are 
Tetranychus urticae and T. kanzawai. Yield losses range from 18 to 
almost 50
 p
ercent. Red mites feed mainly on the underside of leaves, 
but attack old leaves at the base of the plant, causing considerable 
webbing. Further research is urgently needed to identify the most 
effective natural enemies of red spider mites. 
Current recommendations for the control of cassava mites include:
 Plant resistant or tolerant varieties, if available
 In endemic areas, treat stakes with a recommended, locally approved 
i
nsecticide
 Promote good establishment by planting early in the wet season 
 Apply adequate and well-balanced fertilizers to improve plant vigour
 Apply foliar sprays with water at high pressure to reduce mite 
p
opulations
 Strictly enforce quarantine regulations
84  Save and Grow: Cassava
Other important pests that are found only in Latin America are 
the cassava hornworm, burrowing bugs, leaf-cutter ants, shoot flies 
and fruit flies. Great care needs to be taken to avoid accidentally 
introducing those pests from Latin America to Africa and Asia, where 
they have no natural enemies and could, therefore, do great damage. 
A newly identified menace in Asia – found in Cambodia, Lao PDR, 
the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam – is witches’ broom disease, 
which is thought to be caused by a phytoplasma.
Some cassava pests and diseases have also been accidentally 
introduced on other plant species closely related to cassava, such 
as Jatropha curcas, which is used as “living fences” in Asia and has 
become popular recently as a source of biofuel. Special care must be 
taken in moving vegetative planting material of related species between 
countries, and large Jatropha plantations should not be located in 
cassava growing regions.
Weed management
C
ompared to many other crops, the initial growth of cassava is slow. 
That, combined with the wide spacing between planted stakes, 
gives weeds a chance to emerge and compete for sunlight, water and 
nutrients. 
 
In t
he first four months after planting, cassava can easily be 
overwhelmed by competition from narrow-leaf grassy weeds and from 
broad-leaf weeds, which include many leguminous plants. In East 
Africa, weeds are often a more serious production constraint than 
insect pests or diseases and can reduce yields by about 50
 pe
rcent17. 
In Nigeria, farmers spend more time on weeding than on any other 
aspect of crop production
18.
Once the cassava canopy has closed, it will shade out most weeds 
and keep the field almost completely weed-free 19, 2 0 . Six to eight 
months after planting, when cassava starts to shed many leaves (espe-
cially during the dry season), weeds may reappear, but this generally 
do
es not seriously affect yields. Excessive late weed growth may make 
harvesting more difficult, but can also protect the soil from erosion if 
post-harvest rains are heavy.
Chapter 6: Pests and Diseases  85
“Save and Grow” cultural practices can provide an effective defence 
against weeds. While cultural controls may not be 100 pe
rcent effec-
tive, they do help in reducing weed competition, and thus the need 
fo
r mechanical or chemical weeding21. Cultural control begins with 
selection of high-quality planting material from varieties with vigorous 
early growth and tolerance or resistance to important diseases and 
pests. High planting density and the correct type and rate of fertilizer, 
applied in short bands next to the planted stakes, can stimulate early 
crop growth and rapid canopy closure. Planting in the dry season 
under drip irrigation can also encourage the growth of cassava but 
not that of weeds. 
To prevent weed emergence, the soil should be covered with a 
thick layer of mulch, such as rice straw or maize residues. Another 
“Save and Grow” recommendation is to intercrop cassava with fast-
growing plants, such as melons, squash, 
pumpkins, common beans, groundnuts, 
soybeans, mungbeans and cowpeas. As 
those are short-duration crops, they can be 
harvested after about 3 to 4 months, when 
the cassava canopy closes and weeds are 
shaded out. While intercrops may reduce 
cassava root yields, they markedly reduce 
weed growth, and offer an eco-friendly – and 
less expensive – alternative to spraying with 
herbicides. A study in Nigeria of legume 
cover crops in a mixed cassava/maize system 
reported significant improvements in cassava 
root yields when velvet beans were grown to 
suppress weeds
18.
Many smallholder cassava farmers use 
mechanical control measures. Most com -
monly, they remove weeds by hoeing, starting about 15  da ys after 
planting, or after emergence if the cassava is planted horizontally. 
Research in Colombia (Figure 30) found that with hand-weeding at 15, 
30, 60 and 120
 da
ys after planting, cassava root yields were 18 to
nnes 
per  ha, only 8  pe
rcent less than those obtained when weeds were 
controlled with herbicides. When weeds were not controlled at all, 
yields fell to just 1.4
 t
onnes. 
Weeds growing between the rows can also be incorporated 
into the soil using an oxen- or buffalo-drawn cultivator or, where 
Source: Annex Table 6.1
25
20
15
0
5
10
0 1 2 3 4 Chemical 
controlNumber of hand weedings
Figure 30 Effect of hand weeding on fresh cassava root 
yield 280 days after planting, Colombia (t/ha)
86  Save and Grow: Cassava
available, tractors equipped with cultivator blades. In the absence 
of both machinery and draught animals, farmers in Thailand use 
a manually-drawn cultivator, known as a “poor man’s plough”. In 
Viet
 Na
m, farmers use a contraption made from the handlebar and 
front wheel of a bicycle, with a cultivator blade attached behind the 
wheel. This operation is usually followed by hand weeding with a hoe 
between the plants in the row. 
On larger farms or when labour is unavailable or is too expensive, 
weeds are often controlled with herbicides. Many herbicides are highly 
toxic and, being water soluble and persistent in the environment, can 
be washed away to contaminate ground and surface water. Farmers 
need to exercise care in the choice of the herbicide to be used and 
follow the advice of local plant protection specialists. 
Pre-emergence herbicides do not kill existing weeds. Instead, they 
prevent weed seeds in the soil from emerging or, at least, reduce their 
rate of growth. Pre-emergence herbicides are either incorporated into 
the soil before planting or applied on the soil surface with a knapsack 
sprayer immediately after planting. Pre-emergence herbicides that are 
selective for cassava can be applied over the vertically planted stakes 
without affecting cassava sprouting or yield. 
The application of pre-emergence herbicides can maintain a cassava 
field almost weed-free for 6 to 8
 we
eks after planting. Farmers may 
apply a mixture of two herbicides – one that controls the grassy weeds 
and one the broad-leaf weeds. A lower dosage is recommended on 
light-textured soils, while a higher dosage may be needed in heavy 
soils, such as loamy clays. Special care needs to be taken when cassava 
is grown in association with other crops, because the pre-emergence 
herbicides normally used for cassava may harm the intercrop. 
At about two months after planting, weeds may need to be 
controlled again to reduce competition with cassava. This is usually 
done by hoeing or using an animal- or tractor-mounted cultivator, 
depending on the height of the growing cassava plants and the extent 
of canopy closure. When most of the weeds are grassy species, it is 
also possible to apply a selective post-emergence herbicide, which 
kills grasses but does not affect the cassava plant. Post-emergence 
herbicides can be used about 4 to 5
 mo
nths after planting, when 
some bottom leaves start to drop off. They should only be applied on 
windless days and with a nozzle shield to prevent spray from reaching 
the cassava stems or leaves.
Chapter 7
Harvest,  
post-harvest and 
value addition
Food for the household, feed for livestock, 
and raw material for a wide array  
of value-added products, from coarse flour 
to high-tech starch gels – cassava  
is a truly multipurpose crop.

Chapter 7: Harvest, Post-harvest and Value Addition  89
O
ne of the major positive attributes of cassava 
is that it does not have a specific harvesting 
period. Roots may be harvested any time be-
tween six months and two years after planting. 
Du
ring periods of food shortage, they can be harvested 
whenever needed, often one plant – or even one root – at 
a time. For human consumption, harvesting usually takes 
place at about 8 to 10
 mo
nths; for industrial uses, a longer 
growing period generally produces a higher root and starch 
yield. Once harvested, roots can be consumed directly by 
the farm household, fed to livestock or sold for processing 
into a wide array of value-added products, ranging from 
coarse flour to high-tech modified starch gels. 
The root is not the only part of the plant that can be 
put to good use. In Africa, cassava leaves are cooked as a 
vegetable. In many countries, the green part of the upper 
stem, including leaves and petioles, are fed to cattle and 
buffaloes, while the leaf-blades are fed to pigs and chickens. 
In China, Thailand and Viet Nam, fresh leaves are used 
for raising silkworms. Stumps are burned as fuelwood, 
and woody stems are ground-up and used as a substrate 
for growing mushrooms. 
Harvesting roots and plant tops
C
assava roots are generally harvested by cutting off the stems about 
20
 cm a
bove ground, then lifting the whole root system out of the 
ground by pulling on the stump. If the soil is too hard or the roots are 
too deep, it may be necessary to dig around the roots with a hoe, spade 
or pick to remove the soil, avoiding damage to the roots in the process.
To harvest their cassava, Thai farmers have developed a metal tool 
that is attached to a pole and used as a lever. It works best in loose or 
light-textured soils. In heavier soils, which can become very hard in the 
dry season, a harvesting blade attached to a tractor is sometimes used. 
The blade cuts through the soil just below the roots and the forward 
movement of the tractor pushes the root clumps to the surface. The 
roots are then cut from the stump and placed in baskets or sacks for 
transport. 
Bringing home the 
harvest. Worldwide, 
cassava growers produced 
more than 280 million 
tonnes of fresh roots  
in 2012
90  Save and Grow: Cassava
The harvest of large cassava fields is often done by middlemen 
who employ teams of workers and use trucks to transport the roots 
to markets or processing plants. In Viet Nam, roots are often carried 
home in two baskets hanging on a shoulder pole; in Lao PDR, farm-
ers use bamboo shoulder baskets. In China, the harvested roots are 
ge
nerally transported in a wagon attached to a 2-wheel tractor, while 
in Thailand, many farmers use a small agricultural truck. 
After the root harvest, plant tops are often left to dry on the ground 
and later incorporated in the soil to help maintain its fertility (see 
Chapter 5, Crop nutrition). However, farmers can greatly increase 
the total amount of cassava foliage available for feeding to animals 
by cutting the green tops every 2.5 to 3
 mo
nths during the plant’s 
growth cycle. After each pruning, the remaining stems will sprout 
again and produce another crop of leaves within 2 to 3
 mo
nths. For 
maximum foliage production, cassava stakes should be planted with 
closer spacing, of about 60
 x 6
0 c
m. 
Young leaves harvested at regular intervals during the cassava 
growth cycle tend to have a higher protein and lower fibre content than 
those collected at the final root harvest, when plants are normally 11
 to
 
12 mo
nths old. The younger leaves are more palatable and provide a 
higher quality feed. Similarly, leaf meal containing only leaf-blades has 
a higher protein and lower fibre content than meal that also contains 
petioles and green stems.
In an experiment in Thailand, total dry leaf yield was 710
 kg 
per 
ha when leaves were harvested only at the time of root harvest, at 
11.5
 mo
nths after planting (Annex table 7.1). But the yield increased 
to 2.6 to
nnes when leaves were cut five times during the same period. 
The total leaf protein yield also increased, from 170 kg w
ith only one 
leaf harvest to 650 kg
, similar to a good crop of soybeans1,  2. However, 
as the frequency of leaf cutting increased, the final root yield dropped, 
from around 40
 to
nnes per ha when leaves were harvested only at 
the time of the root harvest, to less than 25 to
nnes when leaves were 
harvested a total of five times2. Depending on the cost of labour and 
the relative prices of fresh roots and dry leaves, this system may or 
may not be economic. 
Harvesting the plant tops 4 or 5
 ti
mes during a one-year growth 
cycle also removes a large amount of nutrients – especially nitrogen – 
f
rom the field, and would not be sustainable without the application 
of large amounts of mineral fertilizer to maintain soil fertility.
Chapter 7: Harvest, Post-harvest and Value Addition  91
Post-harvest uses and value addition
Food for direct consumption
Young cassava leaves are regularly picked and cooked for human 
consumption in several African countries, notably Cameroon, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and the United Republic of 
Tanzania. The tender leaves contain up to 25
 pe
rcent protein, on a dry 
matter basis, and are a valuable source of iron, calcium, and vitamins 
A and C
3. The essential amino acid content of cassava leaf protein is 
similar to that found in a hen’s egg. The market value of cassava leaves 
in areas where they are con -
sumed is often higher than that 
of t
he roots, indicating that their 
sale contributes significantly to 
farm household incomes
4. 
Cassava leaves are prepared by 
removing the hard petioles, then 
pounding the blades and young 
petioles with a pestle and mortar, 
and boiling the resulting pulp 
for about 30
 to 6
0 mi
nutes. That 
process eliminates cyanogens 
and makes the leaves safe to eat. 
However, prolonged boiling also 
results in considerable loss of 
vitamin C
5. 
Cassava roots  deteriorate 
rapidly and must be processed 
within a few days of harvesting. 
In many parts of Brazil, fresh 
roots are grated and the liquid, 
which contains much of the roots’ cyanide content, is pressed out. 
The semi-dry mash is then roasted to produce farinha, a coarse flour 
that is spread on many Brazilian dishes. In Africa, grated roots are 
fermented before being roasted on a hot plate to produce a granulated 
flour called gari, or sun-dried and milled into flour, which is mixed 
with water to produce a stiff dough called fufu. 
Steaming is used in Côte d’lvoire and Benin to make another 
granulated cassava product, called attiéké. In the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, pounded cassava flesh is wrapped in banana leaves and 
In Central Africa, tender 
young cassava leaves 
are regularly picked and 
cooked as a protein-rich 
vegetable
92  Save and Grow: Cassava
steamed for several hours to make cassava bread or sticks, called chick-
wangue or kwanga, which are served with soups, stews and sauces.
In I
ndonesia, peeled roots are sliced lengthwise then sun-dried. 
The dry chunks, called gaplek, are then stored or sold in market stalls. 
When needed, gaplek is pounded into flour, which is swirled around 
with a little water to produce small granules the size of rice grains. 
The granules, called tiwul, are steamed, either separately or together 
with rice, and eaten as a “rice extender” when there is not enough 
rice to feed the family. Another popular snack in Indonesia, called 
krepek, is made by washing peeled roots and thinly slicing them with 
a hand- or electric slicer. The slices are placed in cold water, drained 
and then fried in hot oil for a few minutes. Once cooked, they are 
covered with a mixture of hot or sweet spices and sold in small plastic 
bags by hawkers or in local markets. 
High quality cassava flour (HQCF) is cassava flour that has not been 
fermented and can be used as an alternative to wheat flour and other 
starches in bread and confectionary. The processing of cassava roots 
into HQCF involves peeling, washing, grating, pressing, disintegration, 
sifting, drying, milling, screening, packaging and storage. 
Although markets for unfermented high quality cassava flour are 
emerging in sub-Saharan Africa, the challenge is linking them to 
large numbers of small-scale growers whose output is highly variable 
in quality. Where the value chain is relatively well established (for 
example, in Nigeria and Ghana), artificial dryers capable of process-
ing 1 to 3
 tonnes of HQCF per day could help to locate intermediary 
p
rocessing closer to the sources of fresh cassava roots. Processors could 
also provide intermediate bulking, aggregation and transportation 
services, and ensure acceptable quality of products to be delivered to 
the end-use market
6.
Native starch is extracted from cassava roots in some countries, 
mainly in Asia, and used in food products. If properly extracted, 
cassava starch is pure white, with low levels of fat and proteins and 
a non-cereal taste, which is desirable in many food products
7. Starch 
extraction can be done at almost any scale – in backyard artisanal 
production units and large-scale fully mechanized factories. Many 
artisanal starch production units still operate in Cambodia, India, 
Indonesia and Viet Nam. In backyard processing, cassava roots are 
hand-peeled, washed, grated and mixed with water. The starch water 
is passed through a cloth sieve to remove the fibre, and the suspended 
starch is then left to settle in tanks or flow channels. After the surface 
Chapter 7: Harvest, Post-harvest and Value Addition  93
liquid is siphoned off, the wet starch is collected, crushed and spread 
out on bamboo mats or on concrete floors for sun-drying. In artisanal 
production systems, daily starch output ranges from 50 to 60
 kg o
f 
starch per worker, while semi-mechanized processing can yield up to 
10
 t
onnes a day8.
In some parts of Colombia, wet starch is left to ferment for a few 
days before being sun-dried. This produces sour starch, which is the 
main ingredient in buns called pan de bono. In Tamil Nadu State, 
India, wet starch is collected, crushed and then shaken on a hemp 
cloth to form small starch balls, which are sieved and steamed for 
a few minutes to form tapioca pearls. In Indonesia, cassava starch is 
mixed with shrimp paste, food colouring and water and then extruded 
and thinly sliced by hand. The slices are steamed on bamboo screens 
for 5 to 15
 mi
nutes, after which they are sun-dried on a patio floor for 
half a day, producing hard chips known as krupuk. When deep-fried, 
krupuk swell into brittle soft crackers, which are a popular snack that 
accompanies almost every meal.
Starch extraction produces a considerable quantity of useful 
residues. Root peelings can be recycled as fertilizer and animal feed. 
Once dried, the discarded fibre can be sold as flocculent to the mining 
industry, while low-density starch lost during sedimentation is used 
as pig feed
8.
Industrial uses
In countries such as Thailand and China, much of the native cassava 
starch is further processed to make a range of modified starches, for 
incorporation in food products or use as feedstock for production 
of sweeteners, fructose, alcohol and monosodium glutamate. Along 
with high quality cassava flour, modified starch is also used in the 
manufacture of plywood, paper and textiles. 
In fully mechanized starch factories in China and Thailand, cassava 
roots are thoroughly washed, then cut and rasped, after which the 
mash is mixed with water several times to release the starch granules. 
The “starch milk” – the water containing suspended granules – is 
then separated from the pulp, after which the granules are separated 
from the water by sedimentation or in a centrifuge. At that point, the 
starch requires solar or artificial drying to remove moisture before 
being milled, sifted and packed into 50
 kg b
ags or one-tonne sacks. 
In modern, fully mechanized starch extraction plants, daily output 
is as high as 300
 t
onnes8.
94  Save and Grow
Increasingly, cassava is also being used for production of fuel 
ethanol. Fresh roots or dried chips are cleaned, washed, crushed and 
mixed with water, heated with liquefying enzymes, then cooled with 
other enzymes, which convert the starch to sugars. The sugars are fer-
mented with yeast to produce ethanol, which is concentrated through 
di
stillation and finally dehydrated in a molecular sieve to produce 
99.5 pe
rcent pure anhydrous ethanol. It can be blended with gasoline 
to produce “gasohol” with 10 pe
rcent, 20 pe
rcent or even 85 pe
rcent 
ethanol. Cassava-based fuel ethanol factories are now operating, or 
are under construction, in Cambodia, China, Colombia, Thailand 
and Viet Nam. Conversion to ethanol will become one of the major 
uses of cassava fresh roots and dry chips in the future, especially in 
China
9. 
Tw
o recent cassava mutations could expand considerably cassava’s 
use in industrial applications7. The first, an induced mutation, has very 
small starch granules which offer a faster rate of hydrolysis – thus 
reducing the cost of producing ethanol or sweeteners – than other 
major starches. The second, a spontaneous mutation, produces an 
amylose-free “waxy” starch that has great advantages when used in 
frozen foods. Gels made from the starch have excellent water reten-
tion during defrosting, a highly desirable characteristic for the food 
in
dustry. 
Animal feed
Both the roots and leaves of the cassava plant can be used as on-farm 
animal feed or as an ingredient in commercial animal feed. Because 
of their high cyanide content, however, fresh roots or leaves can be fed 
to animals only in very small quantities. Cassava roots are chipped 
or sliced, while leaves are chopped into small pieces. Before being fed 
to animals, the cassava pieces are spread out on a floor overnight in 
order to release some of the cyanide by evaporation. The root chips 
and leaf pieces can also be sun-dried to 12 to 14
 pe
rcent moisture 
content, then stored for future use. Alternatively, the chopped pieces 
of roots and leaves can be packed tightly in plastic bags or air-tight 
containers and fermented to make silage (see p.96). Both sun-drying 
and ensiling will release most of the cyanide, making those products 
safe as feed for pigs, cattle, buffaloes and chickens.
Dried cassava chips are produced by first washing, or at least slightly 
cleaning, the roots in a rotary drum to remove soil and some of the 
outer skin. The roots are then chipped and spread out on a concrete 
Chapter 7: Harvest, Post-harvest and Value Addition  95
floor for sun-drying, and turned regularly with a rake to promote 
uniform drying. Normally it takes up to four days of sun-drying to 
make dried chips with about 12 to 14
 p
ercent moisture content. 
In Viet Nam, cassava roots are often roughly peeled and sliced by 
hand before sun-drying in courtyards or along roadsides. In Thailand, 
many farmers take their cassava to drying yards, where the roots are 
first dumped into the hopper of a diesel-powered chipping machine. 
The chipped roots are then spread over large concrete floors for sun-
drying and turned over regularly by a vehicle with a large rake. After 
two or three days of drying, the chips are piled up by a grader and 
loaded in bulk onto trucks. Some are further processed into pellets, 
mainly for export.
Although the need for rapid chipping and drying adds to the 
complexity of production, small farmers in Asia and their market -
ing partners, who provide cassava chips for the animal feed export 
in
dustry, have shown that with adequate infrastructure, smallholder 
produce can be dried locally and reach market chains with relatively 
low losses
10.
Chips are usually sold directly or milled into a powder that can 
be mixed with other ingredients – such as soybean meal, full-fat 
soybeans, fishmeal or other protein sources – to make a nutritious 
animal feed that is usually supplemented with methionine, vitamins 
and minerals. When the diet is well-balanced, in terms of energy and 
protein, the performance of pigs is very similar to that obtained with 
a diet based on maize or broken rice. Cassava meal is highly digestible 
and naturally contaminated with lactic acid bacteria and yeast, which 
improve the micro-flora in the digestive tract of animals. At low levels, 
hydrogen cyanide in cassava feed increases the efficiency of an enzyme, 
lactoperoxidase, which is a natural antibiotic that kills mycotoxins 
in the animal’s body and milk. Animals raised on cassava diets have 
generally good health, good disease resistance and a low mortality 
rate. They require few if any antibiotics in their feed
11.
Dry cassava leaf meal (also known as “cassava hay”) is usually 
obtained by cutting the plant tops at 2.5 to 3-month intervals during 
the cassava growth cycle. The best quality foliage meal contains a 
large proportion of leaves and only very young stems, and is obtained 
from plants or shoots that are less than three months old. After 
harvesting, the foliage is chopped and spread out on a concrete floor 
for sun-drying. The moisture content needs to be reduced from about 
96  Save and Grow: Cassava
70 percent to 12 to 14 pe rcent so that the foliage can be milled and 
stored. 
Owing to its high fibre content, cassava foliage meal is suitable 
mainly for ruminants. Research has shown how supplementation with 
1 to 2 kg o
f cassava hay per animal per day increases the milk yields 
of dairy cows and boosts levels of thiocyanate in the milk, which may 
enhance milk quality and storability. Condensed tannins in the foliage 
meal also reduces gastro-intestinal nematodes, indicating that the meal 
may act as an anti-helminthic agent
12. For non-ruminants, dry cassava 
foliage meal is best limited to 6 to 8 pe
rcent of the feed for growing pigs 
and to less than 6 pe
rcent of that for broilers. In broilers, the inclusion 
of cassava foliage meal is useful mainly as a natural pigmenter – the 
high content of xanthophyll pigments (500-600
 mg
/kg) improves the 
pigmentation of skin in broilers and that of egg yolks13.
Leaf silage is made by mixing chopped leaves with 0.5 p
ercent salt 
and 5 to 10 pe
rcent cassava root meal or rice bran, and then placing 
the mixture in large plastic bags or air-tight containers. The leaves 
are compacted to expel all air and the bags are sealed. Under these 
anaerobic conditions, the leaves start to ferment, resulting in a sharp 
drop in pH, as well as in cyanide content. After about 90
 da
ys of 
fermentation, the silage is ready to be fed to animals, usually pigs and 
cattle. The silage can be stored in tightly sealed bags for at least five 
months without spoiling. The ensiled leaves contain about 21
 pe
rcent 
crude protein and 12 pe
rcent crude fibre. They also contain 200 pp
m 
hydrogen cyanide, compared to more than 700 pp
m before ensiling. 
In experiments conducted in Viet Nam, a diet containing 15 pe
rcent 
ensiled cassava leaves improved the daily weight gain of pigs and 
reduced their feed cost by 25
 p
ercent14.
Chapter 8
The way forward
Governments need to encourage 
smallholders’ participation  
in a sustainable cassava development 
agenda, and support research  
and extension approaches  
that “let farmers decide”.

Chapter 8: The Way Forward  99
T
his guide has presented a range of science-based “Save and 
Grow” farming practices that will contribute to the sustain-
able intensification of cassava production. They provide the 
ba
sis for competitive, profitable production systems that 
boost productivity per unit of input, while protecting and nurturing 
the agro-ecosystem.
However, those recommendations will have little impact unless they 
are incorporated in large-scale agricultural development programmes 
and are widely adopted by farmers. For that to happen, governments 
will need to make policies that encourage the participation of all 
stakeholders, and particularly smallholder producers, in a sustainable 
cassava development agenda. Successful adoption of “Save and Grow” 
will also depend on farmers’ understanding of agro-ecosystem func-
tions and on their capacity to make wise technology choices. That will 
re
quire significant strengthening of extension services and innovative 
approaches to the transfer of knowledge and technologies1.
Policies for sustainable intensification
S
mallholder farmers raise crops and livestock primarily to feed their 
families and to earn enough income from sales to cover expenses, 
such as education and health care. They often have a short planning 
horizon, focused on satisfying their immediate needs, rather than 
ensuring the long-term sustainability of their farming enterprise. 
Farmers need to become aware that some of their current practices 
jeopardize their natural resource base and, with it, their future pro-
ductivity, income, livelihood and food security. 
Lo
cally, negative impacts of unsustainable crop production include 
the erosion, compaction and nutrient depletion of soil, the loss of 
natural habitats and natural enemies of pests, and the risks posed 
to farmers’ health by the excessive use of pesticide. Other farming 
practices have off-farm impacts which, while not harming the farmer 
directly, are nevertheless of serious concern to society at large. Those 
“negative externalities” range from nitrate pollution of waterways and 
flooding of downstream areas, to pesticide residues in food and the 
greenhouse gas emissions responsible for climate change.
Like most people, farmers are usually reluctant to spend time 
and money solving problems that do not directly affect them. The 
100  Save and Grow: Cassava
challenge facing cassava-producing countries, therefore, is to set 
policies and create an institutional environment that facilitate sustain-
able intensification of cassava production, while expanding market 
oppor
tunities for small-scale cassava growers. 
Policymakers should begin with an analysis of the current state of 
the cassava subsector. In most countries, cassava production is still 
labour-intensive and largely subsistence-oriented, with low levels of 
technology uptake, high production and post-harvest losses, and weak 
linkages to markets. 
Transforming the subsector, in a way that ensures food security, 
income generation and economic diversification, requires the identi-
fication of profitable value chains and market preferences, strategies 
fo
r reducing price variability on the demand side, and options for 
enhancing the quality, volume and reliability of production on the 
supply side. Improving market access and competitiveness will require 
vertical and horizontal coordination, strategic market-led research, 
and mechanisms for stimulating innovation and sharing knowledge, 
including farmers’ practical know-how. As policymakers encourage 
higher levels of value addition, a major effort will be needed to integrate 
small-scale growers into the cassava marketing chain. 
While there is no “one-size-fits-all” set of recommendations, it is 
possible to identify the key features of enabling policies and institutions 
for sustainable intensification of smallholder cassava production.
Promote “Save and Grow” farming approaches and practices.  
Cassava growers should be encouraged to phase out slash-and-burn 
production, and cultivate smaller areas of flat and more fertile land 
nearer to their homes, transport and markets. Continuous production 
on the same land will help to reduce forest clearing, the annual burning 
of vegetation (which emits large amounts of carbon dioxide into the 
atmosphere), and the drudgery of carrying heavy loads of cassava 
roots over long distances. The steeper land can be returned to forest 
vegetation or used for perennial fruit trees, rubber or coffee. 
To be sustainable, however, intensive systems of cassava production 
need to use good quality planting material and ecosystem-based 
approaches to soil fertility management and to insect pest, disease 
and weed control. In many countries, low-input cassava production 
systems already incorporate key “Save and Grow” practices, such as 
reduced or zero tillage, the use of cover crops and mulches, and mixed 
Chapter 8: The Way Forward  101
cropping. Extension and advisory services – organized by the public 
sector, the private sector or NGOs – will be crucial in improving 
those practices by ensuring access to relevant external knowledge and 
linking it to the wealth of knowledge held by smallholders themselves. 
Participatory extension approaches will be needed to support farmers 
in testing and adapting technologies. New channels of communication, 
including radio, mobile phones and the Internet, can help to reduce 
the transaction costs of extension. 
Cassava growers may also need incentives – for example, payments 
for environmental services – to adopt new farming practices and to 
manage other ecosystem services besides food production, such as soil 
conservation and protection of biodiversity. Adoption of integrated 
pest management can be promoted by removing “perverse subsidies” 
on synthetic pesticides, regulating their sale, and providing incen -
tives for local production of biopesticides and insectaries for natural 
pred
ators. 
Facilitate improvements in the input supply chain. Disposable 
household income is too low to allow many small-scale farmers 
to move from low-input/low-output production to more intensive 
cultivation of cassava. Action is needed, therefore, to make improved 
planting material, mineral fertilizer and other inputs more affordable 
to smallholders. Governments should encourage private investment 
in the production of inputs, and establish credit lines to enable private 
suppliers to organize bulk procurements that ensure the availability 
of inputs in time for planting. Where necessary, the quality of inputs 
should be routinely tested to prevent the sale of bogus products. To 
avoid the inappropriate use, wastage and negative environmental 
impacts of mineral fertilizer, its distribution should be accompanied 
by training and extension advice.
Institutions that facilitate participation – such as farmer groups, 
community organizations and development NGOs – can also help to 
reduce the transaction costs of accessing input markets, while “smart 
subsidy” voucher schemes could be introduced to allow smallholders 
to purchase fertilizer and planting material at below-market prices. 
Although subsidies are attractive to smallholders, they can create 
dependency; in the long-term, group-based revolving credit funds will 
be a more sustainable source of financing. Once cassava growers see 
how fertilizer and improved varieties can help to increase their yields 
and income, they will want to buy more – and will have the financial 
102  Save and Grow: Cassava
means to do so. That, in turn, stimulates competition, which lowers 
prices and makes inputs more affordable. 
Control pest and disease threats with resistant varieties and 
strict quarantine regulations. As cassava production is intensi -
fied, continual cropping risks provoking an upsurge in pests and 
di
seases, which are already one of the most serious constraints to 
increased productivity. Rather than resorting to chemical pesticide, 
cassava intensification programmes should promote integrated pest 
management, which draws on resistant cultivars, biological control 
agents, bio-pesticides and habitat management to protect crops, 
conserve biodiversity and safeguard the environment and human 
health. All germplasm and varieties deployed should be resistant to the 
predominant pathogen populations present in each specific country, 
agro-ecozone and farming system. In the absence of a formal seed 
supply, quality planting material should be made available to growers 
through community systems of multiplication and distribution.
With increased international movement and exchange of cassava 
germplasm, improved phytosanitary measures will be needed to 
ensure that planting material is free of pests and diseases. Sensitive and 
robust detection and diagnostic methods to prevent the movement of 
pathogens are essential for improving quarantine security and bringing 
national phytosanitary regulations into line with international trade 
conventions and protocols. The transfer of cassava germplasm should 
be carefully planned in consultation with quarantine authorities and 
should be in amounts that allow adequate testing. Cassava germplasm 
should only be moved as seed, pathogen-tested in vitro material, or 
as cuttings from re-established pathogen-tested in vitro material that 
has been grown under containment
2. 
Support cassava research and technology development. Applied 
agricultural research can facilitate the transformation of cassava 
cropping systems by helping to develop varieties with disease- and 
pest-resistance and more desirable commercial traits, water-efficient 
irrigation technologies, and appropriate farm machinery, especially 
for land preparation, planting and harvesting. Policies should help 
to foster public-private partnerships for technology development, 
and link them to markets in order to facilitate the up-scaling of suc-
cessful innovations. For example, Thailand’s Tapioca Development 
In
stitute, which was set up with government funding but operates 
Chapter 8: The Way Forward  103
as an independent non-profit organization, is working with CIAT 
and Kasetsart University to breed “waxy” starch cassava varieties 
adapted to Thai growing conditions. The Latin American and 
Caribbean Consortium to Support Cassava Research and Development 
(CLAYUCA) is a regional network of public and private entities that 
plans and coordinates research for the cassava subsector. Acting as 
a facilitator of public/private alliances, CLAYUCA fosters sustain -
able cassava production intensification and improved access to elite 
ge
netic material. Among recent achievements is a small-scale, low-cost 
technology, easily operated and managed by smallholder farmers, for 
local production of ethanol from cassava.
Improve rural infrastructure. Good physical infrastructure is 
essential for the smooth operation of the cassava value chain, espe-
cially considering the need to process the roots within 48
 ho urs of 
harvesting. The poor state of rural roads in many countries not only 
limits farmers’ access to inputs and financial services – it also severely 
restricts their access to markets. The lack of storage and processing 
infrastructure leads to high post-harvest losses, undermines market 
development and discourages all stakeholders in the value chain from 
producing and supplying quality-differentiated products with desirable 
market traits.
Investment in road networks and in warehousing and processing 
capacity in production zones will help to link small-scale cassava 
farmers and processors to growth markets for intermediate cassava 
products that have a longer shelf life. It will also contribute to price 
stabilization, reduction of post-harvest losses and lower transaction 
costs. With appropriate technology and equipment, community-level 
processing plants could produce high quality cassava flour, grits and 
chips for rural and urban-based industries, allowing cassava growers to 
retain a bigger share of the value-addition. There is a need to develop 
models for community-level bulking and grading that can assure 
regular supply to potentially large urban markets. Since mechanical 
drying powered by fossil fuels has often proven to be uneconomic in 
isolated rural areas, processing power based on a combination of solar 
energy, fossil fuel and biomass sources should be considered. 
 
Develop value chains and markets in order to boost demand and 
increase returns to producers. Initially, those markets will be local 
ones for fresh roots or leaves, or small-scale processors of fermented 
104  Save and Grow: Cassava
flour or low-quality starch. As markets develop and demand grows, 
farmers have an incentive to grow more by intensifying production. An 
increased supply of raw material provides an incentive to processors 
to expand capacity and modernize their factories, which stimulates 
further production increases, driving an upward spiral of rural 
development. Examples of successful market development include 
the rapid growth in Thailand of the production of dried cassava chips 
and, more recently, of fuel ethanol for domestic markets and export.
Governments should promote private investment in cassava pro-
cessing plants, and foster associations that link cassava growers and 
pr
ocessors, such as the Thai Tapioca Starch Association and Nigeria’s 
Cassava Market and Trade Development Corporation. Cassava 
industry stakeholders may need assistance in initiating industry-wide 
or activity-specific associations that can help enterprises of different 
sizes to work together. An active industry association can foster coop-
eration among value chain participants, promote grading standards, 
sh
are market information, and lobby governments to support cassava 
subsector development. Industry clusters – market-driven, private 
sector-oriented groups or enterprises – can be formed around such 
associations to define the measures and activities needed to improve 
productivity and to make the value chain work efficiently. 
Planners will need to link support to the cassava subsector with 
action to develop associated industries. For example, development 
of cassava as a feed resource should exploit complementarities with 
livestock and poultry enterprises; increasing output of high quality 
cassava flour will require the strengthening of links with the bakery 
industry.
Reduce farmers’ exposure to price volatility. For people whose 
livelihood depends mainly on agriculture, volatility in output prices 
means fluctuations in income and greater risk. Guaranteeing farmers 
a reasonable price for their crops will encourage them to invest in 
production. One approach is subsidies, such as the Thai Government’s 
national “pledging scheme”, which set aside in 2012 some US$1.43
 bi
l-
lion for purchasing roots from cassava growers 3. More sustainable 
approaches include contract farming, which helps to reduce the 
transaction costs of input supply and output marketing by aggregating 
small parcels of farmland. Large scale processors not only ensure an 
agreed price to farmers but also provide technical services in return 
for growers’ commitment to deliver all or a significant portion of 
Chapter 8: The Way Forward  105
production. In the Philippines, for example, one of the country’s 
leading food manufacturers offers supply contracts to farmers’ 
cooperatives that can consolidate at least 20
 ha o
f land for cassava 
production. It provides start-up technical advice, a guaranteed floor 
price, and a marketing agreement that covers product quality, volumes 
and a delivery schedule
4. 
Governments in developing countries should foster greater avail-
ability of crop insurance which, while it does not eliminate risk, does 
mi
tigate losses caused by adverse weather and similar events, thus 
improving risk-bearing capacity and encouraging investment in 
production. While common in industrialized countries, crop insur-
ance is very limited in the developing world and particularly so for 
sm
allholder crops such as cassava. 
Letting farmers decide
F
armers will need to be convinced that “Save and Grow” practices 
are better than those they are using already and – very importantly 
– that they have short-term economic benefits. Not all recommended 
practices are equally useful, nor are they universally applicable. 
Farmers are interested only in those practices that fit well with their 
cropping systems and ways of farming. Practices that may have been 
effective during trials on experimental stations may not perform nearly 
as well under farmers’ local conditions. 
Since most technologies have advantages and disadvantages, trade-
offs need to be made. That can best be done by farmers themselves, 
rather than by researchers or extensionists. It is important, therefore, 
that cassava growers be involved in all stages of agricultural research 
and technology development, and are empowered to test and validate, 
in their own fields, practices aimed at improving the sustainability of 
cassava production. By shifting the extension paradigm from “teach-
ing” to “learning”, two methodologies – farmer participatory research 
(F
PR) and farmer field schools (FFS) – have proven highly effective 
in incorporating sustainable natural resource management into 
smallholder production systems. 
Farmer participatory research emerged in the 1990s in response to 
the failure of top-down agricultural research to deliver significant 
106  Save and Grow: Cassava
improvements in the well-being of low-income farmers in risk-prone 
environments. The difference between FPR and the more traditional 
“technology transfer” approach is that extension workers do not pro-
mote or recommend any particular practice or technology. Instead, 
th
ey provide a menu of options that farmers can test in simple trials 
in their own fields, with help from research or extension staff5.
CIAT has used farmer participatory research extensively in Asia for 
the development and transfer of cassava production technologies. Its 
FPR programme involved farmers in 99
 vi
llages in China, Thailand 
and Viet Nam, who conducted more than 1  15
0 tr
ials, mostly of 
improved varieties, fertilization, erosion control, plant spacing, green 
manuring and the use of cassava roots and leaves as animal feed.
With FPR, members of a farmers’ group, or farmers in a particular 
village or district, first diagnose the main problems encountered in 
cassava production and, with assistance from research and extension 
staff, consider possible solutions. From this diagnosis, they decide on 
specific topics for their trials. Whenever possible, the farmers visit 
experimental stations or other villages to view similar trials, or confer 
with farmers who have already adopted the practices being tested. 
They then select 3 to 5
 al
ternative treatments, along with one 
traditional practice, to test in simple, unreplicated FPR trials in their 
own fields. If all farmers in the area use the same treatments in one 
type of trial, each trial can be considered a replication, and the results 
can be averaged over those replications. That improves confidence in 
the results obtained. 
The next step is for the farmers to design and conduct the trials, 
with help from research or extension staff. The farmers manage the 
trials themselves, while staff may visit occasionally to discuss progress 
and help solve problems. Finally, at harvest time, all farmers in the 
area, and from neighbouring areas if possible, are invited to a field day 
where they view the trials and discuss the results. During the field 
day, staff present the average results of the various types of trials, as 
well as the production costs, gross income and net income of each 
treatment. Based on this information, farmers can select those varieties 
or practices that they consider most suited to their own conditions. 
The FPR approach has been highly successful. An independent 
impact assessment in 2003 found that, in Thailand, all of the farmers 
who had directly participated in trials had adopted improved varieties, 
98
 pe
rcent the use of mineral fertilizer, and 80 percent soil conserva-
tion practices to control erosion. In Viet Nam, the adoption rates were 
Chapter 8: The Way Forward  107
Preference 1 
with fertilizer, vetiver 
hedgerows
Preference 2 
with fertilizer, pineapple 
hedgerows
Preference 3 
with fertilizer, Tephrosia 
hedgerows
Figure 31 Farmer preferred cassava management options with 
groundnut intercrop in Viet Nam  (million dong)
50
40
30
0
10
20
Production costs Gross income Net income
Source: Annex Table 8.1
82 percent, 80 pe rcent and 71 percent, respectively6. In one province 
of Viet Nam, improved technologies and agronomic practices boosted 
average per hectare root yields from 8.5 to
nnes in 1994, when the trials 
began, to 36 to
nnes in 2003. The Vietnamese trials, and Asian trials 
in general, have shown clearly that farmers prefer treatments which 
produce both sustainable yields and the highest net income (Figure 31). 
Farmer field schools encourage a process of group-based learning, 
and were originally developed by FAO in the late 1980s to promote 
integrated pest management in Asian rice fields. At field schools, farm-
ers are able to deepen their knowledge of agro-ecosystem processes, 
an
d test and validate practices that control pests and diseases and 
improve the sustainability of crop yields.
The application of FFS to cassava began in Africa in the late 1990s. 
The spread of new strains of the viruses causing cassava mosaic 
disease and, more recently, cassava brown streak disease, has served 
as an entry point for promoting IPM and eco-friendly production. 
Field schools link up with programmes that distribute disease-
tolerant cassava varieties and test them in multiplication fields. This 
learning-by-doing approach provides the opportunity for farmers to 
develop strategies to manage disease problems more effectively, while 
improving their cassava production practices.
108  Save and Grow: Cassava
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, an FAO project trained 
facilitators to assist 30 fi
eld schools in Kinshasa province, where yields 
of cassava had been declining owing to pest attacks, diseases and soil 
nutrient depletion. Through training in the use of healthy planting 
material, mulching and intercropping, the field schools helped farmers 
achieve yield increases of up to 250
 p
ercent7.
In Gabon, pest and disease pressure, the lack of improved variet-
ies, and the use of inefficient farming methods kept smallholder 
ca
ssava root yields below 8  to
nnes per ha. Through field schools, 
some 750 gr
owers improved their skills in the selection of healthy 
planting material. Many began using higher-yielding varieties with 
resistance to cassava mosaic disease, as well as improved practices, 
such as avoiding cultivation on wet soils and planting stakes along the 
contours of sloping land in order to limit damage from root rot. They 
also learned the importance of regular weeding, eliminating diseased 
plants, planting in rows and optimizing planting densities. 
An evaluation in 2012 found that, thanks mainly to the use of 
high-yielding varieties, integrated pest management and resource-
conserving cultivation practices, the farmers had increased their 
cassava yields threefold. In one province, yields reached 30 tonnes 
per hectare
8. 
Annex Tables 109
Annex tables
1980
1980
1980
1990
1990
1990
2000
2000
2000
2011
2011
2011
Asia 3.89 3.85 3. 40 3.9 1
Asia 45 .94 4 9.79 49 .46 76 .68
Asia 11 .82 12 .92 14. 53 1 9.60
Sub-Saharan Africa 7. 05 8. 59 11 .01 13. 05
Sub-Saharan Africa 48 .34 70 .26 95 .34 140 .97
Sub-Saharan Africa 6. 85 8. 18 8. 66 10 .80
Latin America/Caribbean 2. 65 2. 75 2. 54 2. 67
Latin America/Caribbean 29 .70 32 .21 31 .30 34 .36
Latin America/Caribbean 11 .23 11 .72 12 .34 12 .88
Table 1.1 H arvested area of cassava (million ha)
Table 1.2 C
assava production (million tonnes)
Table 1.3 A
verage cassava yields (tonnes/ha)
Source: FAO. 2013. FAOSTAT statistical data 
base (http://faostat.fao.org)
Source: FAO. 2013. FAOSTAT statistical data 
base (http://faostat.fao.org)
Source: FAO. 2013. FAOSTAT statistical data 
base (http://faostat.fao.org)
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st century crop
110  Save and Grow: Cassava
Cassava root yield (t/ha)
Tillage treatment CMC 92 MCol 113
Hand preparation of planting holes 17 .9 12 .3
Oxen-drawn plough followed by ridging  15 10
Rototilling followed by ridging 16. 8 10. 9
1 m wide strips prepared with rototiller,  
alternated with 1 m wide unprepared strips  13 .5 9 .5
Without preparation 10 .8 10 .4
Preparation with oxen-drawn plough  16 11 .6
Preparation with tractor-mounted rototiller  15 .7 14. 1
1 m wide strips prepared with hoe,  
alternated with 1 m wide unprepared strips
 12 .2 9.7
LSD 5% 4 1. 8
Table 2.1 E ffect of method of land preparation on the yield of two cassava varieties  
in Mondomito, Cauca, Colombia in 1981/82
Source: Howeler, R.H., Ezumah, H.C. & 
Midmore, D.J. 1993. Tillage systems for root 
and tuber crops in the tropics. Soil Tillage 
Res., 27: 211-240.
Tillage system
Fertilizer rate* Conventional tillage No tillage
50-50-50 44 .94 5 6.06
Average 47 .13 59 .38
0-50-50 42. 7 5 5.13
100-50-50 53. 69 6 7
Table 2.2 E ffect of tillage system and nitrogen application rate in the first year on cassava 
root yield, Khon Kaen, Thailand, 2000/01 (tonnes/ha)
Source: Adapted from Jongruaysup, S., 
Treloges, V. & Chuenrung, C. 2003. Minimum 
tillage for cassava production in Khon Kaen 
Province, Thailand. Songklanakarin J. Sci. 
Technol., 25(2): 191-197. 
Fertilization No  fertilization
 Treatment*
Root 
yield
(t/ha)
Root 
yield
(t/ha)
Top 
biomass
(t/ha)
Top 
biomass
(t/ha)
Root dry matter(%)
Root dry matter(%)
CT+mulch 5. 92 3.9 8 30 .9 4. 66 2. 93 3 0.6
NT+mulch 6. 11 3.85 31 4. 66 2. 95 3 0.4
CT 5. 51 3.1 8 30 .2 2. 19 1. 43 3 0.1
NT 4. 42 2. 77 29 .5 1. 93 1. 43 2 9.2
Mean 5. 49 3.4 5 30 .4 3.3 6 2. 19 3 0.1
Table 2.3 A verage responses of cassava top biomass, yield and root dry matter content  
(8 years) on dry weight basis to surface plant mulch, fertilizer and tillage in sandy loam 
soi
ls, northern Colombia
Source: Adapted from Cadavid, L.F., 
El-Sharkawy, M.A., Acosta, A. & Sánchez, 
T. 1998. Long-term effects of mulch, 
fertilization and tillage on cassava grown in 
sandy soils in northern Colombia. Field Crops 
Res., 57: 45-56.
* N-P
2O5-K2O in kg/ha 
* CT = conventional tillage; NT = no tillage
Chapter 2: Farming systems
Annex Tables 111
1983-841982-831981-82
Cultivar No mulch No mulch No mulchMulch* Mulch* Mulch*
30085/28 5. 3 4. 4 6. 7 5 6. 8 4 .7
30122/2 3.7 3.6 4. 5 3.9 4. 7 3.1
30010/10 3.4 3.7 4 3.1 4. 4 2 .8
Mpelolongi 4.7 4 6. 2 4. 7 6. 1 3.4
2864 4. 8 4. 2 7. 1 5. 2 6. 8 4 .5
30555/3 3.7 3.2 5. 2 3.7 4. 9 3. 2
Means 4. 3 3.8 5. 6 4. 3 5. 6 3.6
Table 2.4 E ffect of mulching on dry storage yield of late season cassava,  
Democratic Republic of the Congo (t/ha)
Source: Adapted from Lutaladio, N., Wahua, 
T. & Hahn, S. 1992. Effects of mulch on soil 
properties and on the performance of late 
season cassava (Manihot esculenta  Crantz) 
on an acid ultisol in southwestern Zaire. 
Tropicultura, 10(1): 20-26.
Cassava 
yield 
(t/ha)
Starch 
content 
(%)
Inter-
crop yield 
(t/ha)
Gross 
income
Production 
costs
Net 
income
Farmers’ 
preference 
(%)
Treatment (million dong/ha)
C + mungbean intercrop 29 .81 26 .66 0. 57 20 .38 8. 64 11 .74 42
C + maize intercrop 21 24 .3 3.6 43 15 .56 8. 59 6. 90 35
C + groundnut intercrop 30 .74 27 .66 1. 483 25 .81 10 .07 15 .73 48
C + soybean intercrop 34 .54 27 .5 0 19 .00 8. 62 10 .38 6
C + maize intercrop 21 .00 24 .30 3.6 4 15 .56 8. 59 6. 90 35
Cassava monoculture 31 .88 27 .93 - 17 .53 7. 12 10 .42 29
Table 2.5 A verage results of three FPR intercropping trials conducted by farmers  
in Suoi Rao and Son Binh villages, Chau Duc district, Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Viet Nam in 2001/02
Source: Adapted from Nguyen, H.H., Tran, 
T.D., Nguyen, T.S., Tran, C.K., Tuan, V.V. & 
Tong, Q.A. 2008. The FPR cassava project 
and its impact in South Viet Nam. In  R.H. 
Howeler, ed. Integrated cassava-based 
cropping systems in Asia. Working with 
farmers to enhance adoption of more 
sustainable production practices.  Proceedings 
of a Workshop on the Nippon Foundation 
Cassava Project in Thailand, Viet Nam and 
China, held in Thai Nguyen, Viet Nam. Oct. 
27-31, 2003. pp. 140-156.
Yield (t/ha)Dry soil 
loss (t/ha)Treatment* Cassava Groundnut
C+G, no fertilizer, no hedgerows 10 3.9 13. 08 0. 7
C+G, with fertilizer, Tephrosia hedgerows 40 .1 14. 67 0. 85
C+G, with fertilizer, vetiver hedgerows 32 23. 71 0. 85
C monoculture with fertilizer, no hedgerows  10 6.1 19 .17 -
C+G, with fertilizer, no hedgerows 64 .8 19 .23 0. 97
C+G, with fertilizer, pineapple hedgerows 32 .2 19 .39 0. 97
C monocult., with fertilizer, Tephrosia hedgerows 32 .5 23. 33 -
Table 2.6 E ffect of various crop management treatments on soil loss due to erosion and 
the yield of cassava and intercropped groundnut, as well as the gross and net income in an 
FPR erosion control trial conducted by six farmers in Kieu Tung village of Thanh Ba district, 
Phu Tho province, Viet Nam in 1997 (3rd year)
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 2001. The 
use of farmer participatory research (FPR) in 
the Nippon Foundation Project: Improving 
the sustainability of cassava-based cropping 
systems in Asia. In  R.H. Howeler & S.L. Tan, 
eds. Cassava’s potential in Asia in the 21st 
Century: Present situation and future research 
and development needs.  Proc. 6th Regional 
Workshop, held in Ho Chi Minh city, Viet 
Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. pp. 461-489.
* Rice straw at 5 t/ha
* C = cassava; G = groundnut; fertilizers =  60 kg N + 40 P
2O5 + 120 K2O/ha; all plots received 10 t/ha pig manure 
112  Save and Grow: Cassava
Production 
cost (‘000 Rs/ha)
Gross income 
(‘000 Rs/ha)
Net returns 
(‘000 Rs/ha)
Cassava root 
yield (t/ha)
Chapter 3: Varieties and planting material
Treatment*
Half treatment 41 .2 19 .60 80 .90 61 .30
No treatment 26 .9 16 .04 56 .24 40 .19
Full treatment 40 .9 24 .94 80 .73 55 .79
Table 2.7 E conomics of sequential cropping with cassava and vegetable cowpea,  
Tamil Nadu, IndiaSource: Adapted from Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University (TNAU). 2002. Report 
to Quinquennial Review Team – Tuber crops 
(1997-98 to 2001-02). Coimbatore Centre, 
AICRP on tuber crops (other than potato). 
Dept. of Vegetable Crops, Horticultural 
College and Research Institute, TNAU 
Coimbatore. pp. 34-35.
* Full treatment =  26 kg/ha P + 25 tonnes/ha farmyard manure 
Number 
of 
accessions
Type of accession* (%)
Location WS LR BL AC OT
Brazil 28 89 0 0 0 0 1 00
India 13 27 0 0 0 0 1 00
Uganda 11 36 0 4 89 7 0
Indonesia 95 4 0 0 0 1 00 0
Benin 60 0 0 1 00 0 0 0
Other 1414 8 6 2 6 3 14 51
CIAT 54 36 1 8 7 11 0 1
IITA 27 56 0 2 8 47 0 25
Nigeria 11 74 0 0 0 0 1 00
Malawi 97 8 0 2 2 72 6 0
Thailand 60 9 0 0 1 00 0 0
Togo 43 5 0 1 00 0 0 0
Table 3.1 M ajor collections of cassava germplasm
Source: Adapted from FAO. 2010. The second 
report on the state of the world’s plant genetic 
resources for food and agriculture. Rome.
Fertilization 
of mother 
plants  
(kg/ha)*
Sprouting 
(%)
Fresh root and stem yields (t/ha)
Table 3.2 E ffect of N, P and K fertilization of mother plants of cassava used for production 
of planting material on the root and stem yield of the subsequent crop
Source: Adapted from Lopez, J. & El-
Sharkawy, M.A. 1995. Increasing crop 
productivity in cassava by fertilizing 
production of planting material. Field Crops 
Res., 44: 151-157.
Unfertilized Fertilized**
0 0 0 85 13. 5 2. 02 19 .1 4. 49
100 0 100 98 14. 9 2. 98 23. 5 4. 38
100 100 100 97 24 .2 3.1 0 30 .2 6. 22
0 100 100 97 17 .5 2. 63 25 .6 3.6 4
100 100 0 77 15 .8 2. 25 24 .7 4. 53
N P K   Roo ts St ems Roo ts St ems
* WS = wild species; LR = landraces/old cultivars; BL = research materials/breeding lines; AC = advanced cultivars;  
OT = others (type unknown or a mixture of two or more types)
* Rates are in kg/ha of N, P and K
** Application at planting of 50 kg N, 43 kg P and 83 kg K/ha
Annex Tables 113
Chapter 4: Water management
Root yield (dry 
weight, t/ha)
Percent of June 
planting yield
Month of planting
July 9.72 9 0
September 6 .70 62
June 10. 81 100
August 6.91 64
October 4.4 8 41
Table 4.1 E ffect of delayed planting on root yield of late season cassava  
in southern Nigeria
Source: Adapted from International Institute 
of Tropical Agriculture (IITA). 1977. Annual 
Report for 1977. Ibadan, Nigeria.
8 months 10 months 12 months 14 months 16 months 18 months Average
Jun 22.15 27 .73 36 .51 47 .31 51 .93 53. 36 3 9.83
Aug 14. 46 22 .96 29 .14 38 .62 39 .57 4 3.68 31 .41
Oct 8. 16 1 6.69 22 .17 23. 95 29 .52 3 2.61 22 .18
May 20.27 26 .98 36 .49 4 2.46 49 .52 57 .06 38 .76
Jul 19.82 29 .07 35 .07 40 .74 4 4.05 48 .51 36 .21
Sep 12.25 17 .64 28 .65 3 2.48 34 .59 36 .26 26 .98
Table 4.2 E ffect of time of planting and age at harvest on yield (t/ha) in Thailand (1976-78)
Source: Adapted from Sinthuprama, S. 1980. 
Cassava planting systems in Asia. In  E.J. 
Weber, J.C. Toro & M. Graham, eds. Cassava 
cultural practices. Proc. of a Workshop, held 
in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. March 18-21, 1980. 
pp. 50-53.
Total 
rainfall**
(mm)
Canopy 
cover***
(%)
Final 
plant stand 
(%)
Root
 yield 
(t/ha)
Starch 
content 
(%)
Starch 
yield
(t/ha)
Month of 
planting*
August 140 9 55 .0 97 18 .92 2 2.33 4. 22
December 16 65 82 .0 90 32 .18 2 5.07 8. 07
April 16 16 87 .8 87 25 .67 2 6.13 6. 71
June 140 2 77 .3 97 23. 32 2 1.27 4. 96
October 12 67 55 .0 91 24 .56 2 5.73 6. 32
February 16 33 89. 2 88 27 .92 3 0.35 8. 47
Table 4.3 E ffect of different planting dates, and the average rainfall received, on cassava 
growth and yield when cassava, cv. Rayong 90, was grown for three consecutive cycles at 
Rayong Field Crops Research Center in Thailand from 1994 to 1998
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 2001. 
Cassava agronomy research in Asia: Has it 
benefited cassava farmers? In  R.H. Howeler 
& S.L. Tan, eds. Cassava’s potential in Asia in 
the 21st Century: Present situation and future 
research and development needs.  Proc. 6th 
regional workshop, held in Ho Chi Minh city, 
Viet Nam. Feb 21-25, 2000. pp. 345-382.
* Roots were harvested after 11 months
** Rainfall received during the 11-month growth cycle
*** Percent canopy cover averaged over all months of the growth cycle
114  Save and Grow: Cassava
Early dry season (November)Rainy season (May-August)
Treatment
No. 
plants 
survived 
(‘000/ha)*
No. 
plants 
survived 
(‘000/ha)*
Root 
yield 
(t/ha)
Root 
yield 
(t/ha)
Starch 
content 
(%)
Starch 
content 
(%)
Planting method No ridge  14. 43  13. 47  16 .66  12 .09  14. 96 18 .65
Planting method Ridge  14. 57  14. 98  16 .64  10 .69  14. 69 18 .63
Stake position Inclined  14. 89  15 .46  17 .14  11 .99  16 .40 18 .68
Stake position Vertical  14. 87  16 .04  17 .03  13. 04  17 .74  19 .04
Stake length (20 cm)  14. 55  14. 52  16 .67  10 .58  14. 53 18 .51
Stake position Horizontal  13. 74  11 .08  15 .85  9. 31  10 .32 18 .17
Stake length (25 cm)  14. 41  13. 54  16 .69  13. 02  15 .41 18 .87
Planting depth (5-10 cm)  14. 43  13. 90  16 .61  9. 74  13. 14 18 .21
Planting depth (15 cm)  14. 56  14. 43  16 .73  12 .71  16 .17 18 .97
Table 4.4 E ffect of planting method, stake position, stake length, and planting depth 
on cassava yield, planted in both the rainy and dry season at Rayong Field Crops Research 
Center, ThailandSource: Adapted from Tongglum, A., 
Vichukit, V., Jantawat, S., Sittibusaya, C., 
Tiraporn, C., Sinthuprama, S. & Howeler, R.H. 
1992. Recent progress in cassava agronomy 
research in Thailand. In  R.H. Howeler, ed. 
Cassava breeding, agronomy and utilization 
research in Asia. Proc. 3rd regional workshop, 
held in Malang, Indonesia. Oct. 22-27, 1990. 
pp. 199-223.
Fresh root yield 
(t/ha)
Starch content  
(% on dry wt. basis)
HCN
(ppm on fresh 
wt. basis)Level of irrigation*
IW/CPE = 0.25 24 .5 72 .9 41
IW/CPE = 0.75 34 .8 75 .2 33
C.D. (0.05) 4. 8   
IW/CPE = 0 (rainfed) 20 .8 72 .7 55
IW/CPE = 0.50 30 .8 74 .5 41
IW/CPE = 1.0 39 .7 75 22
Table 4.5 E ffect of supplemental flood irrigation on the average root yield, and starch  
and HCN contents of cassava planted at CTCRI, Trivandrum, India, 1982-1985
Source: Adapted from Nayar, T.V.R., 
Mohankumar, B. & Pillai, N.G. 1985. 
Productivity of cassava under rainfed and 
irrigated conditions. J. Root Crops , 11(1-2): 
37-44.
1998 1999/20001996/1907Irrigation method/level*
Drip irrigation at 100% of flood irrigation  57 .6 67 .3 51 .2
Drip irrigation at 50% of flood irrigation  51 .6 62 .2 46 .2
Flood irrigation, 5 cm at 0.60 IW/CPE 48 .5 59 .8 45 .8
Drip irrigation at 75% of flood irrigation  53. 9 64 .6 50 .4
Table 4.6 E ffect of flood and drip irrigation on the fresh root yield of cassava grown for 
three consecutive years on sandy loam soils in Bhavanisagar, Tamil Nadu, India (t/ha)
Source: Adapted from Manickasundaram, 
P ., Selvaraj, P .K., Krishnamoorthi, V.V. & 
Gnanamurthy, P . 2002. Drip irrigation and 
fertilization studies in tapioca. Madras Agric. 
J., 89(7-9): 466-468.
Data are the average of three years, 1987-1989
* Out of a total of 15 625 stakes/ha planted
* Irrigation during drought periods (more than 7 days without rains); IW = irrigation water in mm; CPE = cumulative pan 
evaporation in mm.
* IW = irrigation water in mm; CPE = cumulative pan evaporation in mm.
Annex Tables 115
Chapter 5: Crop nutrition 
Total water supplied by 
irrigation as % of water used
Dry root yield 
(t/ha)*
Level of drip  
irrigation (% of  
available soil water) 2006/07 2007/08 2006/07 2007/08
25 8. 53 6. 43 14. 83 17 .85
100 28 .15 15 .36 51 .11 61 .72
0 4. 66 2 .98 0 0
50 13. 10 9. 20  3 4.33  40 .65
Table 4.7 E ffect of different amounts of supplemental drip irrigation on the tuber yield of 
cassava grown for two years at the Federal University of Technology in Akure, Nigeria
Source: Adapted from Odubanjo, O.O., 
Olufayo, A.A. & Oguntunde, P .G. 2011. Water 
use, growth, and yield of drip irrigated 
cassava in a humid tropical environment. Soil 
Water Res., 6(1): 10-20.
* For a 9-month growth cycle, during which period total rainfall was 872 and 795 mm in 2006/07 and 2007/08, respectively
N P K Ca Mg S B Cu Fe Mn Zn
Plant tops 69 .1 7. 4 33. 6 37 .4 16 .2 8. 2 0. 07 0. 03 0. 45 0. 33 0. 26
Roots 30 .3 7. 5 54 .9 5. 4 6. 5 3.3 0. 08 0 .02 0. 38 0. 02 0. 1
Fallen leaves 23. 7 1. 5 4 24 .7 4 2. 5 0. 04 0. 01 0 0. 37 0. 18
Table 5.1 N utrient distribution in 12-month-old cassava, cv. M Ven 77, grown without 
fertilization in Carimagua, Colombia (kg/ha)
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 1985. 
Mineral nutrition and fertilization of 
cassava. In  J.H. Cock & J.A. Reyes, eds. 
Cassava: Research, production and utilization. 
UNDP-CIAT Cassava Program. Cali, Colombia. 
pp. 249-320.
Number 
of roots/plant
Root yield 
(t/ha)
HCN content 
(ppm, fresh 
weight basis)
Total dry 
matter 
(t/ha)
Neem-coated urea 5. 8 22 .59 46 .8 12 .13
Rubber cake-coated urea 4. 9 17 .76 48 .2 10 .4
Urea 5. 1 1 9.95 47 .4 10 .52
Urea super-granule 5. 9 25 .65 48 .4 13. 97
Table 5.2 E ffect of four sources of nitrogen on the yield and quality attributes of cassava, 
cv. Sree Visakham, grown at the College of Agriculture, Trivandrum, India, 1989-1991
Source: Vinod, G.S. & Nair, V.M. 1992. Effect 
of slow release nitrogenous fertilizers on the 
growth and yield of cassava. J. Root Crops 
(Special issue), 17: 123-125.
116  Save and Grow: Cassava
Source: Nguyen Huu Hy, personal 
communication.
Fertilizer rate*
(kg/ha)
Second cropFirst crop
 Green manures Kiduma KidumaMbuela Mbuela
None 28 3 23. 7 14 .9 14. 9 7. 4
None 1, 417 39 .6 1 8.6 33. 1 18
Tithonia 28 3 37 .6 2 3.5 17 .8 8. 7
Chromolaena 0 19 .9 1 8.2 12 .2 7. 3
Chromolaena 850 35 .2 2 3.4 18 .6 9
None 0 12 .7 1 0.5 10 .1 5. 4
None 850 31 .4 1 9.6 17 .6 9
Tithonia 0 32 .8 1 8.1 12 .7 6. 4
Tithonia 850 41 .5 2 1.7 20 .2 8. 2
Chromolaena 28 3 29 .5 2 1.1 18 .4 8. 5
Table 5.4 E ffect of application of various rates of chemical fertilizer and incorporation  
of the green manure species Tithonia diversifolia and Chromolaena odorata on cassava fresh 
root yields (t/ha) during two cropping cycles at two sites in the Bas-Congo region  
of DR CongoSource: Adapted from Pypers, P ., 
Sanginga, J.M., Kasereka, B., Walangululu, 
M. & Vanlauwe, B. 2011. Increased 
productivity through integrated soil 
fertility management in cassava-legume 
intercropping systems in the highlands of 
Sud-Kivu, DR Congo. Field Crops Res ., 120: 
76-85. * Fertilizer = 17-17-17 as N-P
2O5- K2O
Root yield 
(t/ha)
Starch con-
tent 
(%)
Gross 
income 
(million d/ha)
Production 
costs 
(million d/ha)
Net  
income  
(million d/ha)
Treatment*
with 
fertilizer
without 
fertilizer
with 
fertilizer
without 
fertilizer
with 
fertilizer
without 
fertilizer
with 
fertilizer
without 
fertilizer
with 
fertilizer
without 
fertilizer
C +pigeon pea GM 15 .62 6. 75 23. 6 21 .7 18 .28 7. 90 8. 11 5. 90 10 .17 2. 00
C +groundnut IC  20 .41 8. 62 25 .35 24 .08 24 .82 10 .09 8. 11 5. 90 16 .72 4. 19
C+Crotalaria GM 18 .75 8. 5 24 .95 21 .72 21 .94 9. 95 8. 11 5. 90 13. 83 4. 05
C+Gliricidia AC 19 .3 1 6.75 26 .32 24 .95 22 .58 19 .60 7. 71 5. 50 14. 87 14. 10
C monoculture 17 .44 4. 81 23. 28 21 .28 20 .41 5. 63 6. 01 3.8 0 14. 40 1. 83
C+Mucuna GM 17 .82 8. 56 24 .45 22 .35 20 .85 10 .02 8. 11 5. 90 12 .74 4. 12
C+cowpea IC 19 .44 7. 44 24 .92 22 .65 22 .75 8. 71 8. 11 5. 90 14. 64 2. 81
C+Leucaena AC 20 .68 13. 39 25 .52 24 .4 24 .20 15 .67 7. 71 5. 50 16 .49 10 .17
Average 18 .68 9. 35 24 .8 2 2.89 21 .98 10 .94 7. 75 5. 54 14. 23 5. 40
Table 5.3 E ffect of planting intercrops, green manures and alley crops, with or without 
fertilizers, on cassava and intercrop yields, as well as the gross and net income obtained 
when cassava, KM 60, was grown for the 16th consecutive year at Hung Loc Agricultural 
Research Center in Dongnai, Viet Nam in 2007/08
* C = cassava; GM = green manure;  
IC = intercrop; AC = alley crop
Annex Tables 117
Source: Adapted from Nguyen The Dang, 
personal communication, 2002.
Treatment 
N-P2O5-K2O 
(kg/ha)
Organic 
(t/ha)
Cassava 
yield 
(t/ha)
Maize 
yield 
(t/ha)
Gross 
income
Fertilizer 
costs
Production 
costs
Net 
income
Farmers’ 
preference
Table 5.6 E ffect of various fertilizer combinations on the fresh root yields of cassava, cv. 
Faroka, and on the grain yield of intercropped maize, as well as gross and net income when 
grown in Jatikerto Station in Malang, East Java, Indonesia, in 2005/06 (2nd year)
Source: Adapted from Utomo, W.H., Marjuki, 
W., Hartoyo, K., Suharjo Retnaningtyas, E., 
Santoso, D. & Wijaya, A. 2010. Enhancing the 
adoption of improved cassava production 
and utilization systems in Indonesia (The 
ACIAR Cassava Project in Indonesia). In  R.H. 
Howeler, ed. A new future for cassava in Asia: 
Its use as food, feed and fuel to benefit the 
poor. Proc. 8th Regional Workshop, held in 
Vientiane, Lao PDR. Oct. 20-24, 2008. pp. 
490-507.
(mil. Rp/ha)
135-0-0 0 35 .6 1 .93 13. 52 0. 45 7. 01 6. 51 2
135-50-100 0 37 .47 2. 1 14. 3 1. 27 8. 02 6. 28 4
0-0-0 10 compost 22 .67 1. 63 9. 05 1 6. 27 2. 78  
135-0-0 5 compost 39 .33 1. 97 14. 75 0. 95 7. 88 6. 87 5
135-0-0 5 sugar m ud 33. 73 1. 67 12 .63 0. 95 7. 32 5. 31  
0-0-0 0 10 .96 1. 1 4. 72 0 4. 1 0 .62  
135-50-0 0 36 .8 2. 07 14. 05 0. 69 7. 37 6. 68 3
0-0-0 10 manure 26 .53 1. 66 10 .32 2 7. 65 2. 67  
135-0-0 5 manur e 35 .63 2. 26 13. 89 1. 45 8. 01 5. 88 1
135-50-0 5 compost 39 .07 1. 87 14. 56 1. 19 8. 1 6. 46  
DM (%) N (kg) P (kg) K (kg)
1 t pig manure 40 8. 2 5. 5 5. 5
1 t sheep manure 35 10 .5 2. 2 9. 4
50 kg 15-15-15 fertilizer 10 0 7. 5 3.3 6. 2
1 t cattle manure 32 5. 9 2. 6 5. 4
1 t chicken manure 57 16 .6 7. 8 8. 8
1 t city garbage compost  71 6. 9 3.3 6. 1
Table 5.7 A verage nutrient content of one tonne of various types of wet manure and 
compost as compared to 50 kg of 15-15-15 chemical fertilizers
Source: Howeler, R.H. 2001. Cassava 
agronomy research in Asia: Has it benefited 
cassava farmers? In  R.H. Howeler & S.L. Tan, 
eds. Cassava’s potential in Asia in the 21st 
Century: Present situation and future research 
and development needs.  Proc. 6th regional 
workshop, held in Ho Chi Minh city, Viet 
Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. pp. 345-382.
Cassava 
root yield 
(t/ha)
Harvest 
Index
Gross 
income
Fertilizer 
costs
Production 
costs
Net 
income
Treatment  (‘000 dong/ha)
5 t FYM/ha 7. 79 0. 49 3, 895 50 0 3, 300 59 5
15 t FYM/ha 13. 11 0. 52 6, 555 1, 500 4, 300 2, 255
80 N+80 K2O/ha + 5 t FYM/ha 17.98 0.48 8, 990 1, 180 4,0 80 4, 910
80 N+80 K2O/ha + 15 t FYM/ha 18.5 0.48 9, 250 2, 180 5,0 80 4, 170
No fertilizers, no FYM  3.2 5 0. 39 1, 625 0 2, 800 -1 ,175
10 t FYM/ha 10 .02 0. 52 5,0 10 1,0 00 3, 800 1, 210
80 N+80 K2O/ha, no FYM 15 .47 0. 5 7, 735 68 0 3, 580 4, 155
80 N+80 K2O/ha + 10 t FYM/ha 18.7 0.49 9, 350 1, 680 4, 580 4, 770
Table 5.5 E ffect of the application of farm-yard manure (FYM) and chemical fertilizers  
on cassava yield and economic benefit at Thai Nguyen University of Agriculture and 
Fore
stry in Thai Nguyen province of Viet Nam, in 2001 (2nd year)
118  Save and Grow: Cassava
Table 5.8 E ffect of various soil conservation practices on the average relative cassava yield 
and dry soil loss due to erosion as determined from soil erosion control experiments, FPR 
demonstration plots and FPR trials conducted in Viet Nam from 1993 to 2003
Relative dry 
soil loss (%)
 Relative  
cassava yield (%)
Soil conservation practice
Cassava 
mono cu
lture
Cassava 
mono cu
lture
Cassava 
+ groundnut
Cassava 
+ groundnut
With fertilizers; vetiver grass hedgerows 11 3 11 5 48 51
With fertilizers; Flemingia macrophylla hedgerows 103 109 51 62
With fertilizers; Leucaena leucocephala hedgerows 11 0 - 69 -
With fertilizers; pineapple hedgerows 10 0 10 3 48 44
With fertilizers; contour ridging; no hedgerows  10 6 - 70 -
With fertilizers; groundnut intercrop; no hedgerows 10 6 10 0 81 10 0
No fertilizers; no hedgerows 32 92 13 7 20 2
With fertilizers; no hedgerows (check) 10 0 - 10 0 -
With fertilizers; Tephrosia candida hedgerows 11 0 10 5 49 64
With fertilizers; Paspalum atratum hedgerows 11 2 - 50 -
With fertilizers; Gliricidia sepium hedgerows 10 7 - 71 -
With fertilizers; vetiver + Tephrosia hedgerows - 10 2 - 62
With fertilizers; closer spacing, no hedgerows 12 2 - 10 3 -
With fertilizers; maize intercrop; no hedgerows 69 - 21 -
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 2008. 
Results, achievements and impact of 
the Nippon Foundation Cassava Project. 
In R.H. Howeler, ed. Integrated cassava-
based cropping systems in Asia. Working 
with farmers to enhance adoption of more 
sustainable production practices. Proc. of 
a Workshop on the Nippon Foundation 
Cassava Project in Thailand, Viet Nam and 
China, held in Thai Nguyen, Viet Nam, Oct. 
27-31, 2003. pp. 161-209.
Chapter 6: Pests and diseases 
No. 
of hand 
weedings*
Frequency of hand weeding  
(days)
Fresh 
cassava root 
yield (t/ha)
Yield as % 
of maximum 
yield***
 3 +   30 60 12 0 UH 16 .0 76
 1+       12 0 UH 7. 0 33
 3 15 30 60     12 .9 61
 1 15         5. 8 28
 2 15 45       15 .4 73
 0 We edy check 1. 4 7
 4 + 15 30 60 12 0 UH ** 18 .0 86
 2+     60 12 0 UH 11 .0 52
 4 15 30 60 12 0   19 .5 92
 2 15 30       13. 3 63
 2   30 60     16 .3 77
 0 Ch emical weed check 21 .1 10 0
Table 6.1 E ffect of hand weeding at different times and frequencies on the fresh root yield 
of cassava, cv. CMC 39, at 280 days after planting at CIAT, Cali, Colombia
Source: Doll, J.D. & Piedrahita, C.W. 1978. 
Methods of weed control. Cali, Colombia, CIAT.
* + = additional weedings
** UH = until harvest, as needed
*** Percentage of the yield of cassava weeded with herbicides
Annex Tables 119
Chapter 7: Harvest, post-harvest and value addition 
Chapter 8: The way forward
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 2012. 
Cassava leaf production for animal feeding. 
In R.H. Howeler, ed.  The cassava handbook 
– A reference manual based on the Asian 
regional cassava training course, held in 
Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 626-648.Gross 
income
Produc-
tion costs
Net 
income
Farmers’ 
ranking
Treatment* (mil. dong/ha)
C+G, no fertilizer, no hedgerows 10 .04 5. 13 4. 91 5
C+G, with fertilizer, Tephrosia hedgerows  11 .58 5. 95 5. 63 3
C+G, with fertilizer, vetiver hedgerows 16 .1 5. 95 10 .15 1
C monoculture with fertilizer, no hedgerows  9. 58 3.7 2 5. 86 6
C+G, with fertilizer, no hedgerows 14. 47 5. 95 8. 52 -
C+G, with fertilizer, pineapple hedgerows 14. 55 5. 95 8. 6 2
C monocult. with fertilizer, Tephrosia hedgerows 11 .66 4. 54 7. 12 4
Table 8.1 E ffect of various crop management treatments on soil loss due to erosion and 
the yield of cassava and intercropped groundnut, as well as the gross and net income in an 
FPR erosion control trial conducted by six farmers in Kieu Tung village of Thanh Ba district, 
Phu Tho province, Viet Nam in 1997 (3rd year)
Source: Adapted from Howeler, R.H. 2001. The 
use of farmer participatory research (FPR) in 
the Nippon Foundation Project: Improving 
the sustainability of cassava-based cropping 
systems in Asia. In  R.H. Howeler & S.L. Tan, 
eds. Cassava’s potential in Asia in the 21st 
Century: Present situation and future research 
and development needs. Proc. 6th Regional 
Workshop, held in Ho Chi Minh city, Viet 
Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. pp. 461-489.
* C = cassava; G = groundnuts; fertilizers = 60 kg N + 40 P
2O5 + 120 K2O/ha; all plots received 10 t/ha pig manure 
Gross income
No. of leaf cuts* 
Total 
dry 
leaf 
yield 
(t/ha)
Pro-
tein 
content 
(%)
Total 
leaf 
protein 
yield 
(t/ha)
Leaves
Produc-
tion costs
Fresh 
root 
yield 
(t/ha)
Roots
Net 
income
Root 
starch 
content 
(%)
Total
(‘000 B/ha)
Table 7.1 A verage effect of the number and timing of leaf cutting on the total dry leaf and 
protein yields, root yield and starch content of two cassava varieties, as well as gross and 
net income obtained in an experiment at TTDI Center in Huay Bong, Thailand
* Cuts no. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 correspond to leaf cuttings at 2.5, 5, 7, 9 and 11 MAP , respectively, with the last cut at time of root 
harvest 
1 2 3 4 5         
        x 0.
71 24
.46 0.
17 39
.89 19
.58 4.
15 45
.43 49
.58 24
.3 25
.28
x       x 1.
5 25
.16 0.
38 39
.91 20
.15 9.
02 46
.01 55
.04 30
.68 24
.35
x x     x 1.
99 25
.21 0.
5 27
.02 21
.1 11
.92 31
.59 43
.51 32
.53 10
.99
x x x   x 2.
56 25
.13 0.
64 28
.6 19
.75 15
.34 32
.53 47
.88 36
.78 11
.09
x x x x x 2.
57 25
.28 0.
65 24
.46 18
.19 15
.56 27
.2 42
.76 40
.07 2.
7
Average  
  1.
87 25
.05 0.
47 31
.97 19
.75 11
.2 36
.55 47
.75 32
.87 14
.88

References  121
Chapter 1: Cassava, a 21st 
century crop
1. Allem, A.C. 2002. The origins and 
taxonomy of cassava. In R.J. Hillocks, J. 
M. Thresh & A.C. Bellotti, eds. Cassava: 
Biology, production and utilization. 
Wallingford, UK, CAB International. 
pp. 1-16.
2. Hershey, C.H. 1987. Cassava 
germplasm resources. In C.H. 
Hershey, ed. Cassava Breeding: A 
Multidisciplinary Review. Proc. of a 
Workshop, held in the Philippines. 
March 4-7, 1985. pp. 1-24.
3. Nassar, N.M.A. 1978. Conservation 
of the genetic resources of cassava 
(Manihot esculenta Crantz): 
determination of wild species location 
with emphasis on probable origin. Econ. 
Bot., 32: 11-320.
4. Olsen, K.M. & Schaal, B.A. 1999. 
Evidence on the origin of cassava: 
phylogeography of Manihot esculenta. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.U.S.A., 96(10): 
5586-5591. 
5. FAO. 1997. Human nutrition in the 
developing world. Food and Nutrition 
series No. 29. Rome.
6. FAO. 1997. Feeding pigs in the tropics. 
FAO Animal Production and Health 
Paper 132. Rome.
7. Fukuba, H., Igarashi, O., Briones, 
C.M. & Mendoza, E.M.T. 1982. 
Determination and detoxification 
of cyanide in cassava and cassava 
products. Philipp. J. Crop Sci., 7(3): 
170-175.
8. Chavez, A.L., Bedoya, J.M., Sanchez, 
T., Iglesias, C., Ceballos, H. & Roca, W. 
2000. Iron, carotene, and ascorbic acid 
in cassava roots and leaves. Food Nutr. 
Bull., 21: 4.
9. Hershey, C., Álvarez, E., Aye, T.M., 
Becerra, L.A., Bellotti, A., Ceballos, 
H., Fahrney, K., Howeler, R., Lefroy, 
R., Ospina, B. & Parsa, S. 2012. Eco-
efficient interventions to support 
cassava’s multiple roles in improving 
the lives of smallholders. In CIAT. Eco-
efficiency: From vision to reality. Cali, 
Colombia.
10. FAO. 2013. FAOSTAT statistical 
database (http://faostat.fao.org).
11. FAO. 2012. Food outlook. Global 
market analysis – November 2012. 
Rome.
12. Sanni, L.O., Onadipe, O.O., Ilona, 
P., Mussagy, M.D., Abass, A. & Dixon, 
A.G.O. 2009. Successes and challenges 
of cassava enterprises in West Africa: A 
case study of Nigeria, Benin, and Sierra 
Leone. Ibadan, Nigeria, IITA.
13. UNCTAD. 2013. INFOCOMM 
commodity profile: Cassava (http://
www.unctad.info/en/infocomm/
aacp-products/commodiry-profile---
cassava/).
14. IFAD/FAO. 2004. A cassava 
industrial revolution in Nigeria: The 
potential for a new industrial crop. The 
Global Cassava Development Strategy. 
Rome. 
15. Haggblade, S. & Zulu, B. 2003. The 
recent cassava surge in Zambia and 
Malawi. Conference paper presented 
at the InWEnt, IFPRI, NEPAD, CTA 
conference “Successes in African 
Agriculture”, Pretoria, December 1-3, 
2003.
16. Republic of Rwanda. Ministry of 
Agriculture and Animal Resources. 
2011. Strategies for sustainable crop 
intensification: Shifting focus from 
producing enough to producing surplus. 
Kigali.
17. Adaramola, Z. 2013. Nigeria: FG to 
export 3.3 million metric tons of cassava 
chips to China. Daily Trust (http://
allafrica.com/stories/201303181254.
html). 
18. Hershey, C., Henry, G., Best, R., 
Kawano, K., Howeler, R. & Iglesias, C. 
2001. Cassava in Asia: Expanding the 
competitive edge in diversified markets. 
In FAO & IFAD. A review of cassava 
in Asia with country case studies on 
Thailand and Viet Nam. Rome.
19. Government of Cambodia. Trade 
Promotion Department. 2012. Cassava 
exports jump 94% (http://www.tpd.gov.
kh/cambodiaproduct/).
20. IFAD/FAO. 2000. The world 
cassava economy. Facts, trends and 
outlook. Rome. 
21. IFAD/FAO. 2004. A review of 
cassava in Latin America and the 
Caribbean with country case studies 
on Brazil and Colombia. Proceedings 
of the validation forum on the Global 
Cassava Development Strategy, vol. 4. 
Rome.
22. Chuzel, G. 2001. The cassava 
processing industry in Brazil: 
Traditional techniques, technological 
developments, innovations and new 
markets. Afr. J. Food Nutritional Secur., 
1(1): 46-59.
23. Universidade de São Paulo. 2012. 
Cassava/CEPEA: Revenue of cassava 
starch industry drops 20% in 2011. 
Piracicaba, Brazil.
24. Palmer, N. 2012. GCP21: Southern 
Brazil – the next pest hotspot for 
cassava? CIAT News (http://www.
ciatnews.cgiar.org/).
25. FAO/IFAD. 2001. The Global 
Cassava Development Strategy and 
Implementation Plan. Proceedings of 
the Validation Forum on the Global 
Cassava Development Strategy, Rome, 
26-28 April 2000. Vol. 1. Rome.
26. Abdulai, A., Diao, X. & Johnson, 
M. 2005. Achieving regional growth 
dynamics in African agriculture. DSDG 
Discussion paper No. 17. Washington, 
D.C., International Food Policy 
Research Institute.
 
References
122  Save and Grow: Cassava
27. FAO. 2011. FAO’s initiative on 
soaring food prices – Guide for policy 
and programmatic actions at country 
level to address high food prices. Rome.
28. Government of Nigeria. Federal 
Ministry of Information. 2012. Federal 
Ministry of Agriculture launches 
substitution of maize with 10% cassava 
grits in poultry feed (http://fmi.gov.ng/). 
29. Farmconcern International. 2012. 
Cassava revolution turning the tables 
on food and income insecurity in Africa 
(http://www.farmconcern.org/).
30. Han, J. 2010. China completes 
cassava genome sequencing for energy 
use research. Xinhuanet (http://
news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/
china/2010-01/18/c_13140830.htm).
31. Ceballos, H., Sánchez, T., Morante, 
N., Fregene, M., Dufour, D., Smith, 
A.M., Denyer, K., Pérez, J.C., Calle, F. 
& Mestres, C. 2007. Discovery of an 
amylose-free starch mutant in cassava 
(Manihot esculenta Crantz). J. Agric. 
Food Chem., 55(18): 7469-7476.
32. Sánchez, T., Dufour, D., Moreno, 
I.X. & Ceballos, H. 2010. Pasting 
and gel stability of waxy and normal 
starches from cassava, potato, maize, 
and rice under thermal, chemical and 
mechanical stress. J. Agric. Food Chem., 
58: 5093-5099.
33. Ceballos, H., Sánchez, T., Denyer, 
K., Tofiño, A.P., Rosero, E.A., Dufour, 
D., Smith, A., Morante, N., Pérez, 
J.C. & Fahy, B. 2008. Induction and 
identification of a small-granule, high-
amylose mutant in cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz). J. Agric. Food Chem., 
56(16): 7215-7222.
34. Jarvis, A., Ramirez-Villegas, J., 
Herrera Campo, B.V. & Navarro-
Racines, C. 2012. Is Cassava the Answer 
to African Climate Change Adaptation? 
Trop. Plant Biol., 5(1): 9-29.
35. Fermont, A.M. 2009. Cassava 
and soil fertility in intensifying 
smallholder farming systems of East 
Africa. Wageningen, the Netherlands, 
Wageningen University. (thesis)
36. NEPAD/African Union. 2004. 
NEPAD targets cassava as Africa’s 
top fighter against poverty. NEPAD 
Newsletter, 36 (http://www.un.org/
special-rep/ohrlls/News_flash2004/
NEPAD%20Newsletter%20English%20
36.htm).
37. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome.
38. Byrne, D.H., Bellotti, A.C. & 
Guerrero, J.M. 2008. The cassava mites. 
Trop. Pest Manage.,29(4): 378-394. 
39. Hauser, S. 2013. Natural resource 
management in cassava and yam 
production systems. R4D Review – Best 
practice, Issue 9. Ibadan, Nigeria, IITA.
40. Dunstan Spencer & Associates. 
2005. Cassava in Africa: past, present 
and future. In IFAD/FAO. Proceedings 
of the validation forum on the Global 
Cassava Development Strategy. Volume 
2. A review of cassava in Africa with 
country case studies on Nigeria, Ghana, 
the United Republic of Tanzania, 
Uganda and Benin. Rome.
41. Polthanee, A., Wanapat, S., 
Wanapat, M. & Wachirapokorn, 
C. 2001. Cassava-Legumes inter-
cropping: A potential food-feed system 
for dairy farmers. Paper prepared for 
the International workshop “Current 
research and development on use of 
cassava as animal feed”, held in Khon 
Kaen University, Thailand, 23-24 July 
2001.
42. Odemerho, F.O. & Avwunudiogba, 
A. 1993. The effects of changing cassava 
management practices on soil loss: 
A Nigerian example. Geogr. J., 159(1): 
63-69.
43. Howeler, R.H. 2001. The use of 
farmer participatory research (FPR) 
in the Nippon Foundation Project: 
Improving the sustainability of cassava-
based cropping systems in Asia. In R.H. 
Howeler & S.L. Tan, eds. Cassava’s 
potential in Asia in the 21st century: 
Present situation and future research 
and development needs. Proc. 6th 
Regional Workshop, held in Ho Chi 
Minh city, Viet Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. 
pp. 461-489.
44. FAO. 2010. Report of the twenty-
second session of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Rome, 29 November-3 
December 2010. Rome.
45. Pretty, J.N., Noble, A.D., Bossio, 
D., Dixon, J., Hine, R.E., de Vries, F. 
& Morison, J.I.L. 2006. Resource-
conserving agriculture increases yields 
in developing countries. Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 40: 1114-1119.
46. Badgley, C., Moghtader, J., 
Quintero, E., Zakem, E., Chappell, M., 
Aviles-Vazquez, K., Samulon, A. & 
Perfecto, I. 2007. Organic agriculture 
and the global food supply. Renew. 
Agric. Food Syst., 22: 86-108.
47. Power, A.G. 2010. Ecosystem 
services and agriculture: Tradeoffs 
and synergies. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B., 
365(1554): 2959- 2971.
Chapter 2: Farming systems
1. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome. 
2. Leihner, D. 2002. Agronomy and 
cropping systems. In R.J. Hillocks, J.M. 
Thresh & A.C. Bellotti, eds. Cassava: 
Biology, production and utilization. 
Wallingford, UK, CAB International. 
3. Jongruaysup, S., Namwong, P., 
Tiensiriroek, A., Laochaikarm, C., 
Joodkong, A., Katong, S., Watananonta, 
W. & Howeler, R.H. 2007. Minimum 
tillage for cassava in Thailand. In CIAT. 
Cassava research and development in 
Asia: Exploring new opportunities for 
an ancient crop, by R.H. Howeler, ed. 
Proc. 7th regional workshop, Bangkok, 
Thailand. Oct. 28-Nov. 1, 2002. 
Bangkok. pp. 251-263.
4. Derpsch, R., Friedrich, T., Kassam, A. 
& Hongwen, L. 2010. Current status of 
adoption of no-till farming in the world 
and some of its main benefits. Int. J. 
Agric. Biol. Eng., 3(1): 1-25.
5. Nweke, F.I. 1996. Cassava: A cash 
crop in Africa. Collaborative study of 
cassava in Africa. COSCA working 
paper No. 14. Ibadan, Nigeria, IITA.
6. IIRR & ACT. 2005. Conservation 
agriculture. A manual for farmers 
and extension workers in Africa. 
Nairobi, International Institute of 
Rural Reconstruction and African 
Conservation Tillage Network. 
References  123
7. Doran, J.W. & Zeiss, M.R. 2000. Soil 
health and sustainability: Managing 
the biotic component of soil quality. 
Applied Soil Ecology, 15: 3-11.
8. Friedrich, T. & Kienzle, J. 2007. 
Conservation agriculture: Impact 
on farmers’ livelihoods, labour, 
mechanization and equipment. Rome, 
FAO.
9. Uphoff, N., Ball, A.S., Fernandes, 
E., Herren, H., Husson, O., Laing, 
M., Palm, C., Pretty, J., Sanchez, P., 
Sanginga, N. & Thies, J., eds. 2006. 
Biological approaches to sustainable soil 
systems. Boca Raton, Florida, USA, CRC 
Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
10. Friedrich, T., Kassam, A.H. & 
Shaxson, F. 2009. Conservation 
agriculture. In: Agriculture for 
developing countries. Science and 
technology options assessment 
(STOA) project. European Parliament. 
Karlsruhe, Germany, European 
Technology Assessment Group
11. Howeler, R.H., Ezumah, H.C. & 
Midmore, D.J. 1993. Tillage systems for 
root and tuber crops in the tropics. Soil 
Tillage Res., 27: 211-240.
12. Derpsch, R. 2002. Experiences 
of small farmers in Paraguay with 
zero tillage and cover crops. Abstract 
presented at the ASA-CSSA-SSSA 
International annual meeting, 
Indianapolis, USA, 12-16 November 
2002. 
13. Aye, T.M. 2012. Cassava agronomy: 
Land preparation, time and method of 
planting and harvest, plant spacing and 
weed control. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
cassava handbook – A reference manual 
based on the Asian regional cassava 
training course, held in Thailand. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 588-612.
14. Tian, Y.N., Lee, J., Zhang, W.T. & 
Fang, B.P . 1995. Recent progress in 
cassava agronomy research in Thailand. 
In CIAT. Cassava breeding, agronomy 
research and technology transfer in Asia, 
by R.H. Howeler, ed. Proc. 4th regional 
workshop, Trivandrum, Kerala, India, 
2-6 Nov. 1993. Bangkok, CIAT. pp. 
195-216.
15. Pequeno, M.G.O., Vidigal Filho, 
P .S., Tormena, C., Kvitscal, M.V. & 
Manzotti, M. 2007. Efeito do sistema 
de preparo do solo sobre características 
agronômicas da mandioca (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz). Revista Bras. Eng. 
Agríc. Ambiental,  11(5): 476-481.
16. Takahashi , M. 2012. Conservation 
tillage for cassava production Brazil. 
Factsheet prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
17. Jongruaysup, S., Treloges, V. & 
Chuenrung, C. 2003. Minimum tillage 
for cassava production in Khon Kaen 
Province, Thailand. Songklanakarin J. 
Sci. Technol., 25(2): 191-197.
18. Odjugo, P.A.O. 2008. The impact 
of tillage systems on soil microclimate, 
growth and yield of cassava (Manihot 
utilissima) in Midwestern Nigeria. Afr. 
J. Agric. Res., 3(3): 225-233.
19. Ujuanbi, H.U. 2002. A comparative 
analysis in the growth and yield 
of cassava between zero and ridge 
tillage in Western Nigeria. J. Environ. 
Knowledge, 12(2): 20-28.
20. Hauser, S., Ndi, J.N. & Halugalle, 
N.R. 2000. Performance of maize/
cassava intercrop in tilled and no-tilled 
Senna spectabilis alley cropping on 
an Ultisol in Southern Cameroon. 
Agroforestry Syst., 49(2): 177-188. 
21. Fasinmirin, J.T. & Reichert, J.M. 
2011. Conservation tillage for cassava 
(Manihot esculenta Crantz) production 
in the tropics. Soil Tillage Res., 113(1): 
1-10. 
22. Opara-Nadi, O.A. 1993. 
Conservation tillage for increased crop 
production. In FAO. Soil tillage in 
Africa: Needs and challenges. FAO Soils 
Bulletin 69. Rome. 
23. Hershey, C., Álvarez, E., Aye, T.M., 
Becerra, L.A., Bellotti, A., Ceballos, 
H., Fahrney, K., Howeler, R., Lefroy, 
R., Ospina, B. & Parsa, S. 2012. Eco-
efficient interventions to support 
cassava’s multiple roles in improving 
the lives of smallholders. In CIAT. Eco-
efficiency: From vision to reality. Cali, 
Colombia. 
24. IITA. 2000. Starting a cassava farm, 
by B. James, J. Yaninek, A. Tumanteh, 
N. Maroya, A. Dixon, R. Salawu & J. 
Kwarteng. Lagos, Nigeria.
25. Lutaladio, N., Wahua, T. & Hahn, S. 
1992. Effects of mulch on soil properties 
and on the performance of late season 
cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) on 
an acid ultisol in southwestern Zaire. 
Tropicultura, 10(1): 20-26.
26. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Soil fertility 
maintenance: Organic solutions. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. The cassava handbook. A 
reference manual based on the cassava 
training course held in Thailand. Cali, 
Colombia. CIAT. pp. 469-496.
27. Mutsaers, H.J.W., Ezuma, H.C. & 
Osiru, D.S.O. 1993. Cassava-based 
intercropping: A review. Field Crop 
Res., 34: 431-457.
28. Vanlauwe, B., Mutuo, P., Mahungu, 
N. & Pypers, P. 2012. Boosting the 
productivity of cassava-based systems 
in DR Congo. In IITA. R4D Review 
9:30-34, by B. Vanlauwe & K. Lopez, 
eds. Ibadan, Nigeria.
29. Ghosh, S.P., Nair, G.M., Prabhakar, 
M., Pillai, N.G., Mohankumar, B., 
Kabeerathumma, S., Ramanujam, T., 
Pillai, K.S., Thankappan, M., Lakshmi, 
K.R. & Pal, T.K. 1987. Cassava based 
multiple cropping systems. Technical 
bulletin No. 6. Trivandrum, India, 
CTCRI. 
30. Polthanee, A., Wanapat, S., 
Wanapat, M. & Wachirapokorn, C. 
2001. Cassava-legumes inter-cropping: 
A potential food-feed system for 
dairy farmers. Paper prepared for 
the International workshop on current 
research and development on use of 
cassava as animal feed, held in Khon 
Kaen University, Thailand, 23-24 July 
2001. pp. 97-107.
31. Wongwiwatchai, C., Paisancharoen, 
K. & Kokram, C. 2007. Soil fertility 
improvement through manures and 
cropping systems and the effect on cas-
sava productivity in Thailand. In CIAT. 
Cassava research and development in 
Asia: Exploring new opportunities for an
 
ancient crop, by R.H. Howeler, ed. Proc. 
7th regional workshop, Bangkok, Thai-
land. Oct. 28-Nov. 1, 2002. Bangkok. pp. 
224-233.
32. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Soil erosion 
control. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
cassava handbook. A Reference manual 
based on the Asian cassava training 
course held in Thailand. Cali, Colombia. 
CIAT. pp.524-555.
124  Save and Grow: Cassava
33. Sims, B.G., Ellis-Jones, J. & 
Twomlow, S.J. 2000. The development of 
low cost soil and water conservation for 
smallholder farmers in the mid-Andean 
valleys of Bolivia. Paper presented at the 
16th Symposium of the International 
Farming Systems Association and 
4th Latin American Farming Systems 
Research and Extension Symposium on 
globalization and local development: 
Challenges to small scale production. 
Santiago.
34. Gallacher, R.N. 1990. The search for 
low-input soil and water conservation 
techniques: Concepts and trends. In 
Deutsches Institut für tropische und 
subtropische Landwirtschaft. Topics 
in applied resource management 
in the tropics: Experience with 
available conservation technologies. 
Witzenhausen, Germany. pp. 11-37.
35. Nayar, T.V.R., Suja, G., Susan John, 
K. & Ravi, V. 2007. Cassava agronomy 
in India – Low input management. 
In CIAT. Cassava research and 
development in Asia: Exploring new 
opportunities for an ancient crop, by 
R.H. Howeler, ed. Proc. 7th regional 
workshop, Bangkok, Thailand. Oct. 28-
Nov. 1, 2002. Bangkok. pp. 183-203. 
36. Böhringer, A. & Leihner, D.E. 1997. 
A comparison of alley cropping and 
block planting systems in subhumid 
Benin. Agroforestry Syst., 35: 117-130. 
37. Akondé, T.P., Leihner, D.E. & 
Steinmüller, N. 1996. Alley cropping
 
on an ultisol in subhumid Benin. Part 
1: Long-term effect on maize, cassava 
and tree productivity. Agroforestry Syst., 
34: 1-12. 
38. Adjei-Nsiah, S. 2012. Evaluating 
sustainable cropping sequences with 
cassava and three grain legume crops: 
Effects on soil fertility and maize yields 
in the semi-deciduous forest zone of 
Ghana. J. Soil Sci. Environ. Manage., 
3(2): 49-55. 
39. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
(TNAU). 2002. Report to Quinquennial 
Review Team –Tuber crops (1997-98 to 
2001-02). Coimbatore Centre, AICRP 
on tuber crops (other than potato). 
Dept. of Vegetable Crops, Horticultural 
College and Research Institute, TNAU 
Coimbatore. pp. 34-35. 
40. Leihner, D.E. & Lopez, J. 1988. 
Effects of different cassava cropping 
patterns on soil fertility,crop yields 
and farm income. Proceedings of the 
seventh symposium of the International 
Society for Tropical Root Crops, Gosier, 
Guadaloupe (FWI), 1-6 July 1985. 
Paris, Institut national de recherche 
agronomique (INRA). pp. 463-474. 
Chapter 3: Varieties  
and planting material
1. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome.
2. Jarvis, A., Ramirez-Villegas, J., 
Herrera Campo, B.V. & Navarro-
Racines, C. 2012. Is cassava the answer 
to African climate change adaptation? 
Trop. Plant Biol., 5(1): 9-29.
3. Whyte, J. 2012. Cassava: Lessons 
from investments since 2000. Document 
prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
4. FAO. 2010. The second report on 
the state of the world’s plant genetic 
resources for food and agriculture. 
Rome.
5. Fregene, M., Angel, F., Gomez, R., 
Rodriguez, F., Chavarriaga, P., Roca, 
W., Tohme, J. & Bonierbale, M. 1997. 
A molecular map of cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz). Theor. Appl. Genetics, 
95: 431-441.
6. Hershey, C., Álvarez, E., Aye, T.M., 
Becerra, L.A., Bellotti, A., Ceballos, 
H., Fahrney, K., Howeler, R., Lefroy, 
R., Ospina, B. & Parsa, S. 2012. Eco-
efficient interventions to support 
cassava’s multiple roles in improving 
the lives of smallholders. In CIAT. Eco-
efficiency: From vision to reality. Cali, 
Colombia. 
7. Sarakarn, S., Limsila, A., 
Watananonta, W., Suparhan, D. & 
Suriyapan, P. 2000. Cassava breeding 
and varietal dissemination in Thailand 
– Major achievements during the past 
25 years. In CIAT. Cassava’s potential 
in Asia in the 21st century: Present 
situation and future research and 
development needs. Proceedings of the 
6th regional cassava workshop held in 
Ho Chi Minh city, Viet Nam, 21-25 Feb. 
2000, by R.H. Howeler & S.L. Tan, eds. 
pp. 161-166.
8. Kawano, K. 1980. Cassava. In W.R. 
Fehr & H.H. Hadley, eds. Hybridization 
of crop plants. Madison, Wisconsin, 
USA, ASA & CSSA. pp. 225-233.
9. Kawano, K., Daza, P., Amaya, A., 
Rios, M. & Gonçalves, M.F. 1978. 
Evaluation of cassava germplasm for 
productivity. Crop Sci., 18: 377-380.
10. Kawano, K. 2003. Thirty years of 
cassava breeding for productivity – 
Biological and social factors for success. 
Crop Sci., 43: 1325-1335.
11. Hershey, C.H. 1987. Cassava 
germplasm resources. In C.H. 
Hershey, ed. Cassava breeding: A 
multidisciplinary review. Proceedings of 
a workshop, held in the Philippines, 4-7 
March 1985. pp. 1-24.
12. Ceballos, H., Hershey, C.H. & 
Becerra-López-Lavalle, L.A. 2012. New 
approaches to cassava breeding. In 
J. Janick, ed. Plant Breeding Reviews, 
Volume 36. pp. 427-504. New Jersey, 
USA, Wiley-Blackwell. 
13. Ceballos, H., Sánchez, T., Morante, 
N., Fregene, M., Dufour, D., Smith, 
A.M., Denyer, K., Pérez, J.C., Calle, F. 
& Mestres, C. 2007. Discovery of an 
amylose-free starch mutant in cassava 
(Manihot esculenta Crantz). J. Agric. 
Food Chem., 55(18): 7469-7476.
14. Sánchez, T., Dufour, D., Moreno, 
I.X. & Ceballos, H. 2010. Pasting 
and gel stability of waxy and normal 
starches from cassava, potato, maize, 
and rice under thermal, chemical and 
mechanical stress. J. Agric. Food Chem., 
58: 5093-5099.
15. Aiemnaka, P., Wongkaew, A., 
Chanthaworn, J., Nagashima, S.K., 
Boonma, S., Authapun, J., Jenweerawat, 
S., Kongsila, P., Kittipadakul, P., 
Nakasathien, S., Sreewongchai, T., 
Vichukit, V., Becerra-López-Lavalle, 
L.A., Ceballos, H., Rojanaridpiched, 
C. & Phumichai, C. 2012. Molecular 
characterization of a spontaneous waxy 
starch mutation in cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz). Crop Sci., 52: 2121-
2130.
16. Ceballos, H., Sánchez, T., Denyer, 
K., Tofiño, A.P., Rosero, E.A., Dufour, 
References  125
D., Smith, A., Morante, N., Pérez, 
J.C. & Fahy, B. 2008. Induction and 
identification of a small-granule, high-
amylose mutant in cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz). J. Agric. Food Chem., 
56(16): 7215-7222.
17. Liu, J., Zheng, Q., Ma, Q., Gadidasu, 
K.K. & Zhang, P. 2011. Cassava genetic 
transformation and its application in 
breeding. J. Integr. Plant Biol., 53(7): 
552-569.
18. Rojanaridpiched, C., Vichukit, 
V., Sarabol, E., & Changlek, P. 2007. 
Breeding and dissemination of new 
cassava varieties in Thailand. In 
R.H. Howeler, ed. Cassava research 
and development in Asia: Exploring 
New Opportunities for an Ancient 
Crop. Proceedings of the 7th Regional 
Workshop, held in Bangkok, Thailand. 
Oct. 28-Nov. 1, 2002. Cali, Colombia. 
CIAT. pp. 67-76.
19. FAO. 2010. Quality declared 
planting material: standards and 
protocols for vegetatively planting 
material. Rome.
20. Chakrabarti, S.K. 2012. Solutions 
in sight to control the cassava mosaic 
disease in India. Factsheet prepared for 
FAO. (mimeo)
21. CTA. 2012. Cassava stem 
multiplication technology: A viable 
option for industry development?, by 
E.K. Chikwado. Umudike, Nigeria, 
National Root Crops Research Institute. 
22. IITA. 2010. Impact assessment 
evaluation of cassava enterprise 
development project (CEDP). Ibadan, 
Nigeria.
23. ASARECA & TUUSI. 2007. 
Technology transfer mechanism: Three-
tier cassava multiplication approach 
complemented by and the seed voucher 
system. Lessons learnt and scaling up 
(http://www.asareca.org/tuusi/). 
24. IFAD. 2004. Republic of Ghana root 
and tuber improvement programme 
interim evaluation. Report No. 1533-
GH. Rome. 
25. Catholic Relief Services. 2012. 
Seed system innovations in the Great 
Lakes cassava initiative, by S. Walsh. 
Baltimore, USA.
26. IITA. 2000. Starting a cassava farm. 
IPM field guide for extension agents, 
by B. James, J. Yaninek, A. Tumanteh, 
N. Maroya, A. Dixon, R. Salawu & J. 
Kwarteng, eds. Lagos, Nigeria.
27. Lopez, J. & El-Sharkawy, M.A. 1995. 
Increasing crop productivity in cassava 
by fertilizing production of planting 
material. Field Crops Res., 44: 151-157.
Chapter 4: Water 
management
1. UNDP. 2006. Human Development 
Report 2006. Beyond scarcity: Power, 
poverty and the global water crisis. New 
York, USA.
2. IWMI. 2007. Water for food, water 
for life. A comprehensive assessment of 
water management in agriculture, by 
D. Molden, ed. Colombo, IMWI and 
London, Earthscan. 
3. Hershey, C., Álvarez, E., Aye, T.M., 
Becerra, L.A., Bellotti, A., Ceballos, 
H., Fahrney, K., Howeler, R., Lefroy, 
R., Ospina, B. & Parsa, S. 2012. Eco-
efficient interventions to support 
cassava’s multiple roles in improving 
the lives of smallholders. In CIAT. Eco-
efficiency: From vision to reality. Cali, 
Colombia.
4. El-Sharkawy, M.A. 1993. Drought-
tolerant cassava for Africa, Asia and 
Latin America. Bioscience, 43: 441-451.
5. Agili, S.M. & Pardales Jr., J.R. 1997. 
Influence of moisture and allelopathic 
regimes in the soil on the development 
of cassava and mycorrhizal infection of 
its roots during establishment period. 
Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 1997 
22(2): 99-105.
6. Pardales Jr., J.R., & Esquibel, C.B. 
1996. Effect of drought during the 
establishment period on the root 
system development of cassava. Jpn. J. 
Crop Sci., 65(1): 93-97.
7. Pardales Jr., J.R., Yamauchi, A., 
Belmonte Jr, D.V. & Esquibel, C.B. 
2001. Dynamics of root development in 
root crops in relation to the prevailing 
moisture stress in the soil. Proceedings 
of the 6th Symposium of the 
International Society of Root Research, 
Nagoya, Japan, November. pp. 72-73.
8. Howeler, R.H. 2001. Cassava 
agronomy research in Asia: Has it 
benefited cassava farmers? In R.H. 
Howeler & S.L. Tan, eds. Cassava’s 
potential in Asia in the 21st Century: 
Present situation and future research 
and development needs. Proc. 6th 
regional workshop, held in Ho Chi 
Minh city, Viet Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. 
pp. 345-382.
9. Odubanjo, O.O., Olufayo, A.A. 
& Oguntunde, P.G. 2011. Water 
use, growth, and yield of drip 
irrigated cassava in a humid tropical 
environment. Soil Water Res., 6(1): 
10-20. 
10. Sinthuprama, S. 1980. Cassava 
planting systems in Asia. In E.J. Weber, 
J.C. Toro & M. Graham, eds. Cassava 
cultural practices. Proc. of a Workshop, 
held in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. March 
18-21, 1980. pp. 50-53.
11. Odjugo, P.A.O. 2008. The impact 
of tillage systems on soil microclimate, 
growth and yield of cassava (Manihot 
utilissima) in Midwestern Nigeria. Afr. 
J. Agric. Res., 3(3): 225-233.
12. International Institute of Tropical 
Agriculture (IITA) & Program National 
Manioc (PRONAM). 1977. Annual 
Report for 1977. Ibadan, Nigeria, IITA.
13. Tongglum, A., Vichukit, V., 
Jantawat, S., Sittibusaya, C., Tiraporn, 
C., Sinthuprama, S. & Howeler, R.H. 
1992. Recent progress in cassava 
agronomy research in Thailand. In 
R.H. Howeler, ed. Cassava breeding, 
agronomy and utilization research in 
Asia. Proc. 3rd regional workshop, held 
in Malang, Indonesia. Oct. 22-27, 1990. 
pp. 199-223.
14. Nayar, T.V.R., Mohankumar, B. & 
Pillai, N.G. 1985. Productivity of cassava 
under rainfed and irrigated conditions. 
J. Root Crops, 11(1-2): 37-44.
15. Manickasundaram, P., Selvaraj, P.K., 
Krishnamoorthi, V.V. & Gnanamurthy, 
P. 2002. Drip irrigation and fertilization 
studies in tapioca. Madras Agric. J., 
89(7-9): 466-468.
126  Save and Grow: Cassava
Chapter 5: Crop nutrition
1. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome.
2. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Importance of 
mycorrhiza for phosphorus absorption 
by cassava. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
Cassava Handbook – A reference 
manual based on the Asian regional 
cassava training course, held in 
Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT.  
pp. 497-523.
3. Howeler, R.H., Sieverding, E. & Saif, 
S. 1987. Practical aspects of mycorrhizal 
technology in some tropical crops 
and pastures. Plant & Soil, 100(1-3): 
249-283.
4. Howeler, R.H. 1985. Mineral 
nutrition and fertilization of cassava. In 
J.H. Cock & J.A. Reyes, eds. Cassava: 
Research, production and utilization. 
UNDP-CIAT Cassava Program. Cali, 
Colombia. pp. 249-320.
5. Howeler, R.H. 1991. Long-term 
effect of cassava cultivation on soil 
productivity. Field Crops Res., 26: 1-18.
6. Howeler, R.H. 2002. Cassava mineral 
nutrition and fertilization. In R.J. 
Hillocks, M.J. Thresh & A.C. Bellotti, 
eds. Cassava: Biology, production and 
utilization. Wallingford, UK, CAB 
International. pp. 115-147.
7. Howeler, R.H. 1981. Mineral nutrition 
and fertilization of cassava. CIAT Series 
09-EC-4. Cali, Colombia, CIAT.
8. Howeler, R.H. 2001. Cassava 
agronomy research in Asia: Has it 
benefited cassava farmers? In R.H. 
Howeler & S.L. Tan, eds. Cassava’s 
potential in Asia in the 21st Century: 
Present situation and future research 
and development needs. Proc. 6th 
regional workshop, held in Ho Chi 
Minh city, Viet Nam. Feb. 21-25, 2000. 
pp. 345-382.
9. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Effect of cassava 
production on soil fertility and the long-
term fertilizer requirements to maintain 
high yields. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
cassava handbook – A reference manual 
based on the Asian regional cassava 
training course, held in Thailand. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 411-428.
10. Putthacharoen, S., Howeler, R.H., 
Jantawat, S. & Vichukit, V. 1998. 
Nutrient uptake and soil erosion losses 
in cassava and six other crops in a 
Psamment in eastern Thailand. Field 
Crops Res., 57(1): 113-126.
11. FAO. 1980. Review of data on 
responses of tropical crops to fertilizers, 
1961-1977, by I.R. Richards. Rome.
12. Vanlauwe, B. 2012. Integrated soil 
fertility management for increased 
productivity in cassava-based systems. 
Factsheet prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
13. IFAD. 2012. Global consultation on 
cassava as a potential bioenergy crop, by 
E. Kueneman, V. Raswant, N. Lutaladio 
& R. Cooke. Accra.
14. Vinod, G.S. & Nair, V.M. 1992. 
Effect of slow release nitrogenous 
fertilizers on the growth and yield of 
cassava. J. Root Crops (Special issue), 17: 
123-125.
15. Nayar, T.V.R., Suja, G., Susan John, 
K. & Ravi, V. 2007. Cassava agronomy 
in India – Low input management. 
In CIAT. Cassava research and 
development in Asia: Exploring new 
opportunities for an ancient crop, by 
R.H. Howeler, ed. Proc. 7th regional 
workshop, Bangkok, Thailand. Oct. 28-
Nov. 1, 2002. Bangkok. pp. 183-203.
16. Hauser, S. 2012. Natural resource 
management in cassava and yam 
production systems. In IITA. R4D 
Review 9:35-39. B. Vanlauwe & K. 
Lopez, eds. Ibadan, Nigeria.
17. Makinde, E.A., Saka, J.O. & 
Makinde, J.O. 2007. Economic 
evaluation of soil fertility management 
options on cassava-based cropping 
systems in the rain forest ecological 
zone of South Western Nigeria. Afr. J. 
Agric. Res., 2: 7-13.
18. Pypers, P., Sanginga, J.M., Kasereka, 
B., Walangululu, M. & Vanlauwe, B. 
2011. Increased productivity through 
integrated soil fertility management in 
cassava-legume intercropping systems 
in the highlands of Sud-Kivu, DR 
Congo. Field Crops Res., 120: 76-85.
19. Hauser, S., Nolte, C. & Carsky, R.J. 
2006. What role can planted fallows 
play in the humid and sub-humid zone 
of West and Central Africa? Nutrient 
Cycling in Agroecosystems, 76(2-3): 
297-318.
20. Mutsaers, H.J.W., Ezuma, H.C. 
& Osiru, D.S.O. 1993. Cassava-based 
intercropping: A review. Field Crop 
Res., 34: 431-457.
21. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Soil fertility 
maintenance: Organic solutions. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. The cassava handbook – A 
reference manual based on the Asian 
regional cassava training course, held 
in Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 
469-496.
22. Cadavid, L.F., El-Sharkawy, M.A., 
Acosta, A. & Sanchez, T. 1998. Long-
term effects of mulch, fertilization and 
tillage on cassava grown in sandy soils 
of northern Colombia. Field Crops Res., 
57: 45-56.
23. FAO. 2001. Conservation 
agriculture. Case studies in Latin 
America and Africa. Rome.
24. Pypers, P., Bimponda, W., Lodi-
Lama, J.P., Lele, B., Mulumba, R., 
Kachaka, C., Boeckx, P. & Vanlauwe, B. 
2012. Combining mineral fertilizer and 
green manure for increased, profitable 
cassava production. Agron. J., 104: 1-10.
25. Howeler, R. 2001. Nutrient inputs 
and losses in cassava-based cropping 
systems – Examples from Viet Nam 
and Thailand. International workshop 
on nutrient balances for sustainable 
agricultural production and natural 
resource management in Southeast 
Asia. Bangkok, Thailand, 20-22 
February, 2001. Colombo, IWMI.
26. Müller-Sämann, K.M. & Leihner, 
D.E. 1999. Soil degradation and crop
 
productivity research for conservation 
technology development in Andean 
hillside farming. Final report – GTZ 
Project. Stuttgart, Germany, Institute 
of Plant Production and Agroecology in 
the Tropics and Subtropics, University 
of Hohenheim. 
References  127
Chapter 6: Pests and diseases
1. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome.
2. Alvarez, E. 2010. Cassava diseases in 
Latin America, Africa and Asia. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. A new future for cassava 
in Asia: Its use as food, feed and fuel 
to benefit the poor. Proc. 8th regional 
workshop, held in Vientiane, Lao PDR. 
Oct. 20-24, 2008. pp. 590-629.
3. Alvarez, E., Llano, G.A. & Mejia, 
J.F. 2012. Cassava diseases in Latin 
America, Africa and Asia. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. The cassava handbook – A 
reference manual based on the asian 
regional cassava training course, held 
in Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 
258-304. 
4. Bellotti, A.C., Herrera, C.L., 
Hernandez, M.P., Arias, B., Guerrero, 
J.M. & Melo, E.L. 2010. Three major 
cassava pests in Latin America, Africa 
and Asia. In R.H. Howeler, ed. A new 
future for cassava in Asia: Its use as 
food, feed and fuel to benefit the poor. 
Proc. 8th regional workshop, held in 
Vientiane, Lao PDR. Oct. 20-24, 2008. 
pp. 544-577.
5. Bellotti, A.C., Herrera, C.L., 
Hernandez, M.P., Arias, B., Guerrero, 
J.M. & Melo, E.L. 2012. Cassava Pests in 
Latin America, Africa and Asia. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. The Cassava Handbook – 
A reference manual based on the asian 
regional cassava training course, held 
in Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 
199-257.
6. IITA. 2009. Laboratory manual for 
the diagnosis of cassava virus diseases, 
by P.L. Kumar & J.P. Legg, eds. Ibadan, 
Nigeria.
7. Legg, J.P., Jeremiah, S.C., Obiero, 
H.M., Maruthi, M.N., Ndyetabula, 
I., Okao-Okuja, G., Bouwmeester, 
H., Bigirimana, S., Tata-Hangy, W., 
Gashaka, G., Mkamilo, G., Alicai, 
T. & Kumar, P.L. 2011. Comparing 
the regional epidemiology of cassava 
mosaic and cassava brown streak virus 
pandemics in Africa. Virus Res.,159(2): 
161-170.
8. Chakrabarti, S.K. 2012. Solutions 
in sight to control the cassava mosaic 
disease in India. Factsheet prepared for 
FAO. (mimeo)
9. Araham, K., Edison, S., Sreekumari, 
M.T., Sheela, M.N., Unnikrishnan 
& Pillai, S.V. 2010. Recent progress 
in cassava breeding in India. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. A new future for cassava 
in Asia: its use as food, feed and fuel to 
benefit the poor. Proceedings of the 8th 
Regional Workshop, held in Vientiane, 
Lao PDR. Oct. 20-24, 2008. Cali, 
Colombia. CIAT. pp.233-240.
10. Centro Internacional de Agricultura 
Tropical (CIAT). 2006. Improved 
cassava for the developing world. 
Annual Report 2006. Project IP-3. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 11-28.
11. Ubalua, A.O. & Oti, E. 2007. 
Antagonistic properties of Trichoderma 
viride on post-harvest cassava root rot 
pathogens. Afr. J. Biotechnol., 6(21): 
2447-2450.
12. Fondong, V.N., Thresh, J.M. & Zok, 
S. 2002. Spatial and temporal spread of 
cassava mosaic virus disease in cassava 
grown alone and when intercropped 
with maize and/or cowpea. J. 
Phytopathology, 150: 365-374.
13. Gold, S.G., Altieri, M.A. & Belloti, 
A.C. 1990. Direct and residual effects 
of short duration intercrops on cassava 
whiteflies Aleurotrachelus socialis and 
Trialeurodes variabilis (Homoptera: 
Aleyrodidae) in Colombia. Agric., 
Ecosyst. Environ., 32: 57-67.
14. Gold, C.S., Altieri, M.A. & 
Bellotti, A.C. 1989. Effects of cassava 
varietal mixtures on the whiteflies 
Aleurotrachelus socialis and 
Trialeurodes variabilis in Colombia. 
Entomologia Experimentalis et 
Applicata, 53(3): 195-202.
15. Rojanaridpiched, C., Thongnak, N., 
Jeerapong, L. & Winotai, A. 2012. Rapid 
response to the accidental introduction 
of the mealybug, Phenacoccus manihoti, 
in Thailand. Factsheet prepared for 
FAO. (mimeo) 
16. IITA. 2004. IITA Brief: Biological 
control. Ibadan, Nigeria.
17. Leihner, D. 2002. Agronomy and 
cropping systems. In R.J. Hillocks, J.M. 
Thresh & A.C. Bellotti, eds. Cassava, 
production and utilization. Wallingford, 
UK, CAB International. pp. 91-113.
18. Olorunmaiye, P.M. 2010. Weed 
control potential of five legume cover 
crops in maize/cassava intercrop in a 
Southern Guinea savanna ecosystem of 
Nigeria. Aust. J. Crop Sci., 4(5): 324-329.  
19. Doll, J.D. & Piedrahita, C.W. 
1978. Methods of weed control. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT.
20. Doll, J.D., Piedrahita, C.W. & 
Leihner, D.E. 1982. Métodos de control 
de malezas en yuca (Manihot escultenta 
Crantz). In CIAT. Yuca: Investicación, 
producción y utilización. Referencia de 
los cursos de capacitación sobre yuca 
dictados por el CIAT, Cali, Colombia. 
New York, USA, UNDP and Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 241-249.
21. Leihner, D.E. 1980. Cultural control 
of weeds. In E.J. Weber, J.C. Toro & 
M. Graham, eds. Cassava cultural 
practices. Proc. of a workshop, held in 
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. March 18-21, 
1980. pp. 107-111.
Chapter 7: Harvest, post-
harvest and value addition
1. Martwanna, C., Sarawat, P., Limsila, 
A., Tangsakul, S., Wongwiwatchai, 
C., Kebwai, S., Watananonta, W. & 
Howeler, R.H. 2009. Cassava leaf 
production research conducted in 
Rayong and Khon Kaen, Thailand. In 
R.H. Howeler, ed. The use of cassava 
roots and leaves for on-farm animal 
feeding. Proc. regional workshop, held 
in Hue city, Viet Nam, Jan. 17-19, 2005. 
pp. 66-88.
2. Howeler. R.H. 2012. Cassava leaf 
production for animal feeding. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. The cassava handbook – A 
reference manual based on the Asian 
regional cassava training course, held 
in Thailand. Cali, Colombia, CIAT. pp. 
626-648. 
3. Latham, M.C. 1979. Human nutrition 
in tropical Africa. Rome, FAO.
128  Save and Grow: Cassava
4. Lutaladio, N.B. & Ezumah, H.C. 
1981. Cassava leaf harvesting in Zaire. 
In E. Terry, K. Oduro & F. Caveness, 
eds. Tropical root crops: Research 
strategies for the 1980s.  Ibadan, Nigeria, 
IITA. pp. 134-136.
5. Nweke, F. 2004. New challenges in 
the cassava transformation in Nigeria 
and Ghana. EPTD discussion paper No. 
118. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
6. Westby, A. & Adebayo, K. 2012. 
Production of high-quality cassava flour 
to link farmers to markets. Factsheet 
prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
7. Ceballos, H., Sánchez, T. & Dufour, 
D. 2012. Developing cassava varieties 
with unique starch characteristics. 
Factsheet prepared for FAO. (mimeo)
8. FAO. 2007. Guía técnica para 
producción y análisis de almidón de 
yuca. Boletines de servicios agrícolas de 
la FAO Number 163. Rome.
9. Howeler, R.H. 2012. Recent trends 
in production and utilization of cassava 
in Asia. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
cassava handbook – A reference manual 
based on the asian regional cassava 
training course, held in Thailand. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 1-22.
10. IFAD. 2012. Global consultation on 
cassava as a potential bioenergy crop, by 
E. Kueneman, V. Raswant, N. Lutaladio 
& R. Cooke. Accra.
11. Kanto, U., Tirawattanawanich, C., 
Juttupornpong, S., Promthong, S. & 
Moonthong, O. 2009. Advantages of 
cassava in animal health improvement. 
In R.H. Howeler, ed. The use of cassava 
roots and leaves for on-farm animal 
feeding. Proc. regional workshop, held 
in Hue city, Viet Nam, Jan. 17-19, 2005. 
pp. 187-203.
12. Wanapat, M., Chanthakhoun, V., 
Cherdthong, A. & Wanapat, S. 2010. 
Development of practical uses of 
cassava as feed for livestock. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. A new future for cassava 
in Asia: Its use as food, feed and fuel 
to benefit the poor. Proc. 8th regional 
workshop, held in Vientiane, Lao PDR, 
Oct. 20-24, 2008. pp. 691-696.
13. Buitrago, J.A. 2012. Dry cassava root 
and foliage meal for poultry, swine and 
ruminants. In R.H. Howeler, ed. The 
cassava handbook – A reference manual 
based on the asian regional cassava 
training course, held in Thailand. Cali, 
Colombia, CIAT. pp. 665-692.
14. Le Duc, N. & Nguyen, T.H.L. 
2007. The use of cassava roots and 
leaves for feeding pigs in Vietnam. In 
R.H. Howeler, ed. Cassava research 
and development in Asia. Exploring 
new opportunities for an ancient crop. 
Proc. 7th regional workshop, held in 
Bangkok, Thailand. Oct. 28-Nov. 1, 
2002. pp. 518-522.
Chapter 8: The way forward
1. FAO. 2012. Save and Grow. A 
policymaker’s guide to the sustainable 
intensification of smallholder crop 
production. Rome.
2. FAO/IBPGR. 1998. Technical 
guidelines for the safe movement of 
cassava germplasm, by E.A. Frison & E. 
Feliu, eds. Rome.
3. FAO. 2012. Food outlook. Global 
market analysis – November 2012. 
Rome.
4. San Miguel Pure Foods. 2009. 
Nourishing and nurturing families 
worldwide – Cassava assembler. (http://
sanmiguelpurefoods.com/?p=166).
5. Braun, A.R. & Hocdé, H. 2000. 
Farmer participatory research in 
Latin America: Four cases. In W.W. 
Stur, P.M. Horne, J.B. Hacker & 
P.C. Kerridge, eds. Working with 
farmers: The key to adoption of forage 
technologies. Proceedings of an 
international workshop held in Cagayan 
de Ora, Mindanao, Philippines, 12-15 
October 1999. Canberra, ACIAR. 
pp. 32–53.
6. Howeler, R.H. 2008. Results, 
achievements and impact of the Nippon 
Foundation Cassava Project. In R.H. 
Howeler, ed. Integrated cassava-based 
cropping systems in Asia. Working 
with farmers to enhance adoption of 
more sustainable production practices. 
Proceedings of a Workshop on the 
Nippon Foundation Cassava Project 
in Thailand, Viet Nam and China, held 
in Thai Nguyen, Viet Nam. Oct. 27-31, 
2003. pp. 161-209.
7. FAO. 2005. Programme de 
coopération technique. République 
démocratique du Congo. Appui au 
développement de l’approche champs 
écoles paysannes (CEP) - TCP/
DRC/2907. Project final report. Rome.
8. FAO. 2012. Appui a la production et 
protection intégrée du manioc (projet 
TCP/GAB/3203(D). Project final report. 
Rome.
References  129
Abbreviations
CGIAR  Consultative Group on International 
Agricultural Research
CIAT  International Center for Tropical 
Agriculture
CBSD  cassava brown streak disease
CMD  cassava mosaic disease
CTCRI Central  
FAO
  Food and Agriculture Organization  
of the United Nations
FFS  farmer field school
FPR
  farmer participatory research
GDP  gross domestic product 
ha
  hectare
IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural 
Development
IITA  International Institute 
of Tropical Agriculture
IPM  integrated pest management
ITPGRFA
  International Treaty 
on Plant Genetic Resources for Food  
and Agriculture
K  potassium
K20 potassium oxide
N  nitrogen
NGOs  non-governmental organizations 
P  phosphorus
P
2O5 phosphorus pentoxide
t  tonne
TUUSI Technology Uptake and Upscaling 
Support Initiative
SAVE AND GROW: CASSAVAFAO
/T_his guide is the /f_irst on the 
practical application of FAO’s 
“Save and Grow” model of 
agriculture to speci/f_ic 
smallholder crops and farming 
systems. It comes as cassava 
production intensi/f_ies 
worldwide, and growers shift 
from traditional cultivation 
practices to monocropping, 
higher-yielding genotypes, and 
greater use of agrochemicals. 
Intensi/f_ication carries great risks, including soil nutrient 
depletion and upsurges in pests and diseases. /T_he guide shows 
how ecosystem-based “Save and Grow” approaches and practices 
can help tropical developing countries to avoid the risks of 
unsustainable intensi/f_ication, while realizing cassava’s potential 
for producing higher yields, alleviating hunger and rural poverty, 
and contributing to national economic development.
SAVE AND GROW
A GUIDE TO SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION INTENSIFICATION
C
M
Y
CM
MY
CY
CMY
K
copertina cassava save and grow.pdf   1   25aprile2013   12.00