# Small-scale Poultry Production
# publisher: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
# year: unknown
# url: https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/73edfce9-c9a1-4814-b907-d86917967ed3/content
# attribution: FAO, Small-scale Poultry Production
# ghana_specific: False
# extent: 120 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.


*44/
'"0"/*."-130%6$5*0/"/%)&"-5)
4."--4$"-&106-53:130%6$5*0/4."--4$"-&106-53:130%6$5*0/
UFDIOJDBMHVJEF
NBOVBM
FAO ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND HEALTH
Rome, 2004
1
manual
               SMALL-SCALE POULTRY PRODUCTION               SMALL-SCALE POULTRY PRODUCTION
technical guide
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
E.B. Sonaiya
Department of Animal Science 
Obafemi Awolowo University 
Ile-Ife, Nigeria
and  
S.E.J. Swan 
Village Poultry Consultant 
Waimana, New Zealand
Small-scale poultry production iii
Contents
Chapter 1 .......................................................................................................... 1
 Introduction .............................................................................................. 1
Chapter 2 .......................................................................................................... 7
 Species and Breeds ............................................................................... 7
Chapter 3 ........................................................................................................ 13
 Feed Resources .................................................................................... 13
Chapter 4 ........................................................................................................ 23
 General Management .......................................................................... 23
Chapter 5 ........................................................................................................ 37
  Incubation and Hatching ...................................................................... 37
Chapter 6 ........................................................................................................ 41
  Health ..................................................................................................... 41
Chapter 7 ........................................................................................................ 59
 Breed Improvement .............................................................................. 59
Chapter 8 ........................................................................................................ 65
 Production Economics ......................................................................... 65
Chapter 9 ........................................................................................................ 69
 Marketing ............................................................................................... 69
Chapter 10...................................................................................................... 85
 Research and Development for Family Poultry ............................... 85
Bibliography..................................................................................................109
Foreword iv
Foreword
Keeping poultry makes a substantial contribu tion to household food  security thr oughout the 
developing world. It helps diversify incomes and provides quality food, energy, fertilizer and a 
renewable asset in over 80 percent of rural households.  
 Small-scale producers are however constrained by poor access to markets, goods and 
services; they have weak institutions and lack skills, knowledge and appropriate technologies. 
The result is that both production and productivity remain well below potential and losses and 
wastage can be high. However, adapted breeds, local feed resources and appropriate vaccines 
are available, along with proven technologies that can substantially improve productivity and 
income generation.  
 FAO recognizes the impo rtant contribution that poultry can make to  poverty alleviation and 
has programmes that focus on small-scale, low-in put, family based p oultry production. These 
programmes target the more vulnerable househ olds especially those affected by natural 
disasters, HIV Aids and conflict. This manual provides a comprehensive and valuable technical 
guide for those in government service or aid agencies, wishing to embark on projects that 
exploit the potential of small-scale poultry production to improve the livelihoods of the rural 
poor. All aspects of small-scale poultry produc tion are discussed in this  book including feeding 
and nutrition, housing, general husbandry and flock health. Regional differences in production 
practices are described. 
 FAO acknowledges and commends the effort that the authors have put into making such a 
comprehensive and valuable reference for thos e involved in poultry pr oduction in the 
developing world. The views expressed are,  however, those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect those of FAO. Members of the International Network for Family Poultry 
Development (INFPD) have been involved in pr oducing and reviewing this document and their 
contribution is also gratefully acknowledged. A major aim of the INFPD is to bring together and 
disseminate technical information that supports small-scale poultry producers throughout the 
world. 
Small-scale poultry production 1
Chapter 1 
Introduction
The socio-economic Importance of Family Poultry 
Family poultry is defined as small-scale poultry keeping by households using family labour and, 
wherever possible, locally available feed resourc es. The poultry may range freely in the 
household compound and find much of their own food, getting supplementary amounts from the 
householder. Participants at a 1989 workshop in Ile- Ife, Nigeria, defined rural poultry as a flock 
of less than 100 birds, of unimproved or improved breed, raised in either extensive or intensive 
farming systems. Labour is not salaried, but dr awn from the family household (Sonaiya 1990b). 
Family poultry was additionally clarified as “small flocks managed by individual farm families 
in order to obtain food security, income and gainful employment for women and children” 
(Branckaert, as cited in Sonaiya, 1990c). Family poultry is quite distinct from medium to large-
scale commercial poultry farming. 
 Family poultry is rarely the sole means of livelihood for the family but is one of a number of 
integrated and complementary farming activities contributing to the overall well-being of the 
household. Poultry provide a major  income-generating activity from the sale of birds and eggs. 
Occasional consumption provides a valuable source of protein in the diet. Poultry also play an 
important socio-cultural role in many societies. Poultry keepin g uses family labour, and women 
(who often own as well as look after the family flock) are major beneficiar ies. Women often 
have an important role in the development of  family poultry production as extension workers 
and in vaccination programmes. 
 For smallholder farmers in deve loping countries (especially in low income, food-deficient 
countries [LIFDC]), family poultry represents one of the few opportunities for saving, 
investment and security against risk. In some of  these countries, family poultry accounts for 
approximately 90 percent  of the total poultry production (Branckaert, 1999). In Bangladesh for 
example, family poultry rep resents more than 80 percent of the total poultry production, and 90 
percent of the 18 million rural households keep poultry. Landless families in Bangladesh form 
20 percent of the population (Fattah, 1999, citing the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1998) 
and they keep between five and seven chickens per household. In LIFDC countries, family 
poultry-produced meat and eggs are estimated to contribute 20 to 30 percent of the total animal 
protein supply (Alam, 1997, and Branckaert, 1999), taking second place to milk products (38 
percent), which are mostly imported. Similarly, in Nigeria, family poultry represents 
approximately 94 perc ent of total poultry keeping, and accounts  for nearly four percent of the 
total estimated value of the livestock resources in the country. Family poultry represents 83 
percent of the estimated 82 million adult chickens in Nigeria. In Ethiopia, rural poultry accounts 
for 99 percent of the national total production of poultry meat and eggs (Tadelle et al., 2000). 
 Poultry are the smallest livestock investment a village household can make. Yet the poverty-
stricken farmer needs credit assistance even to manage this first investment step on the ladder 
out of poverty. Poultry keeping is traditionally the role of women in many developing countries. 
Female-headed households represent 20 to 30 percent of all rural households in Bangladesh 
(Saleque, 1999), and women are more disadvantaged in terms of options for income generation. 
In sub-Saharan Africa, 85 percent of all households keep poultry, with women owning 70 
percent of the poultry. (Guéye, 1998 and Branckaert, 1999, citing World Poultry 14). 
 Income generation is the primary goal of family poultry keeping. Eggs can provide a regular, 
albeit small, income while the sale of live birds provides a more flexible source of cash as 
required. For example, in the Dominican Republic,  family poultry contributes 13 percent of the 
income from animal production (Rauen et al. , 1990). The importan ce of poultry to rural 
households is illustrated by the example below from the United Republic of Tanzania (see Table 
1.1). Assuming an indigenous hen lays 30 eggs pe r year, of which 50 percent are consumed and 
the remainder have a hatchability of 80 percent, then each hen will produce 12 chicks per year. 
2 Introduction 
Assuming six survive to maturity (with 50 percent mortality), and assuming that three pullets 
and three are cockerels, the output from one hen projected over five years would total 120 kg of 
meat and 195 (6.8 kg) eggs. 
Table 1.1  Projected output from a single initial hen (United Republic of Tanzania) 
Time 
(months)
Nº of hatching eggs Nº of cockerels Nº of pullets Nº of cocks Nº of hens Nº of culls 
0 - - 1 - - - 
8 - - - - 1 - 
20 15 3 3 - - 1 
28 - - - 3 3 - 
40 45 9 9 - - 6 
48 - - - 9 9 - 
60 135 27 27 - - 18 
Total 195 39 40 12 13 25 
Source: Kabatange and Katule, 1989. 
A study on income generation in transmigrant farming systems in East Kalimantan, Indonesia 
(see Table 1.2), showed that family poultry accounted for about 53 percent of the total income, 
and was used for food, school fees and unexpected expenses such as medicines (Ramm et al.,
1984).  
 Flock composition is heavily biased towards chickens in Africa and South Asia, with more 
ducks in East Asia and South America. Flock si ze ranges from 5 – 100 in Africa, 10 – 30 in 
South America and 5 – 20 in Asia. Flock size is related to the poultry farming objectives of:  
x home consumption only;  
x home consumption and cultural reasons;  
x income and home consumption;  and  
x income only. 
(See Table 1.3.) 
 In Bangladesh (Jensen, 1999),  the average production rate per local hen of 50 eggs/year was 
regarded by some as low productivity. However, if it is considered that 50 eggs per hen per year 
represents four hatches from four clutches of eggs laid, incubated and hatched by the mother 
hen, and the outcome is 30 saleable chicken reared per year (assuming no eggs sold or eaten, 80 
percent hatchability and 25 percent rearing mortality), then it is a remarkably high productivity.  
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS  
Family poultry are kept under a wide range of conditions, which can be classified into one of 
four broad production systems (Bessei, 1987):  
x free-range extensive; 
x backyard extensive; 
x semi-intensive; and 
x intensive.
Indicative production levels for the different systems are summarized in Table 1.4. 
Small-scale poultry production 3
Table 1.2  Annual budget for a family farm with 0.4 ha irrigated paddy, 0.1 ha vegetable 
garden, 100 ducks and two buffaloes in Indonesia  
Unit Rupees 
Annual expenses 
      Crops  1 198 000 
      Animals:   
             - Buffaloes   
             - Ducks      1 147 200 
Subtotal  2 345 200 
Annual revenue 
       Crops:   
             - Maize 240 kg 96 000 
             - Rice 4 000 kg 2 000 000 
             - Cassava 600 kg 60 000 
             - Peanut 60 kg 60 000 
             - Soybean 60 kg 30 000 
             - Mixed garden  150 000 
Subtotal Crops  2 396 000 
      Animals:   
             - Buffaloes - meat 150 kg 300 000 
                                - draft 30 days 180 000 
Subtotal Buffaloes  480 000 
             - Ducks       - eggs 13 140 eggs 5 256 000 
Subtotal Animals  5 736 000 
Annual net return to family labour from crops 1 198 000 
(20.7%)
 Annual net return to family labour from livestock 
            - Buffaloes 480 000 
(8.3%) 
            - Ducks 4 108 800 
(71.0%)
Total return to family labour from agriculture 5 786 800 
(100%)
Source: Setioko, 1997. 
Table 1.3  Flock size and poultry farming objectives in Nigeria 
Objectives Flock size % of sample 
Home consumption only 1-10 
Home consumption and cultural reasons 1-10 30
Income and home consumption 11-30 44 
Income only >50 10.5 
Source: Sonaiya, 1990a. 
4 Introduction 
Free-Range Extensive Systems 
In Africa, Asia and Latin America, 80 percent of farmers keep poultry in the first two extensive 
systems. Under free-range conditions, the birds are not confined and can scavenge for food over 
a wide area. Rudimentary shelters may be provided, and these may or may not be used. The 
birds may roost outside, usually in trees, and nest in the bush. The flock contains birds of 
different species and varying ages. 
Backyard Extensive Systems 
Poultry are housed at night but allowed free-range  during the day. They are usually fed a 
handful of grain in the morning and evening to supplement scavenging. 
Semi-Intensive Systems 
These are a combination of the extensive and intensive systems where birds are confined to a 
certain area with access to shelter. They are commonly found in urban and peri-urban as well as 
rural situations. In the “ run” system, the birds are confined in an enclosed area outside during 
the day and housed at night. Feed and water are available in the house to avoid wastage by rain, 
wind and wild animals.  
 In the European system of free-range pou ltry keeping, there are two other types of housing. 
The first of these is the “ ark” system, where the poultry are co nfined overnight (for security 
against predators) in a building mounted on two rails or skids (usually wooden), which enable it 
to be moved from place to place with draught power. A typical size is 2 × 2.5 m to hold about 
40 birds. 
 The second type of housing is the “ fold” unit, with a space allowance (stock density) for 
adult birds of typically 3 to 4 birds pe r square metre (birds/m
2), both inside and (at least this) 
outside. The fold unit is usually small enough to be move d by one person. Neither of these two 
systems is commonly found in developing countries. 
Intensive Systems 
These systems are used by medium to large-scale commercial enterprises, and are also used at 
the household level. Birds are fully confined either in houses or cages. Capital outlay is higher 
and the birds are totally dependent on their owners for all their requirements; production 
however is higher. There are three types of intensive systems: 
x Deep litter system : birds are fully confined (with floor space allowance of 3 to 4 birds/m 2
within a house, but can move around fr eely. The floor is covered with a deep litter (a 5 to 
10 cm deep layer) of grain husks (maize or rice), straw, wood shavings or a similarly 
absorbent (but non-toxic) material. The fully enclosed system protects the birds from thieves 
and predators and is suitable for specially selected commercial breeds of egg or meat-
producing poultry (layers, breeder flocks and broilers). 
x Slatted floor system : wire or wooden slatted floors are used instead of deep litter, which 
allow stocking rates to be increased to five birds/m 2 of floor space. Birds have reduced 
contact with faeces and are allowed some freedom of movement.  
x Battery cage system : this is usually used for laying birds, which are kept throughout their 
productive life in cages. There is a high initial capital investment, and the system is mostly 
confined to large-scale commercial egg layer operations. 
Intensive systems of rearing indigenous chickens commerci ally is uncommon , a notable rare 
exception being in Malaysia, where the industry develo ped in response to the heavy demand for 
indigenous chickens in urban areas (Supramaniam , 1988). However, this  accounts for only two 
in every 100 000 (0.002 percent) of that country’s indigenous chicken. 
Small-scale poultry production 5
Table 1.4   Production and reproduction per hen per year under the different management 
systems 
Production system Nº of eggs per 
hen/year 
Nº of year-old 
chickens 
Nº of eggs for 
consumption and 
sale
Scavenging (free-range) 20-30 2-3 0 
Improved scavenging1/ 40-60 4-8 10-20 
Semi-intensive 100 10-12 30-50 
Intensive (deep litter) 160-180 25-30 50-60 
Intensive (cages) 180-220 - 180-220 
1/ improved shelter and Newcastle Disease vaccination 
Source: Bessei, 1987. 
The above management systems frequently overlap. Thus free-range is sometimes coupled with 
feed supplementation, backyar d with night confinement but withou t feeding, an d poultry cages 
in confined spaces (Branckaert and Guèye, 1999). 
Conclusions 
Over the last decade, the consumption of poultry products in developing countries has grown by 
5.8 percent per annum, faster than that of human population growth, and has created a great 
increase in demand. Family poultry has the potential to satisfy at least part of this demand 
through increased productivity and reduced wastage and losses, yet still represent essentially 
low-input produc tion systems. If production from family poultry is to remain sustainable, it 
must continue to emphasize the use of family labour, adapted breeds and be tter management of 
stock health and local feed resources. This does not exclude the introduction of appropriate new 
technologies, which need not be  sophisticated. However, technologies involving substantially 
increased inputs, particularly if they are expensive (such as imported concentrate feeds or 
genetic material) should be avoided. This is not to say that such technologies do not have a 
place in the large-scale commercial sector, where their use is largely determined by economic 
considerations. 
 Development initiatives in the past have emphasized genetic improvement, usually through 
the introduction of exotic genes, arguing that improved feed would have no effect on indigenous 
birds of low genetic potential. There is a growing awa reness of the need to balance the rate of 
genetic improvement with improvement in feed availability, health care and management. There 
is also an increased recognition of the potential of indigenous breeds and their role in converting 
locally available feed resources into sustainable production. 
 This manual aims to provide those involved with poultry development in developing 
countries with a practical guide and insight into the potential of family poultry to improve rural 
livelihoods and to meet the increasing demand for poultry products. 
Small-scale poultry production 7
Chapter 2 
Species and Breeds 
Different Poultry Species and Breeds 
All species of poultry are used by rural smallholders throughout the world. The most important 
species in the tropics are: chickens, guinea fowl, ducks (including Muscovy ducks), pigeons, 
turkeys and geese. Local strains are used, but most species are not indigenous. The guinea fowl 
(Numididae) originated in West Africa; the Muscovy duck ( Cairina moschata ) in South 
America; pigeons  (Columba livea ) in Europe; turkeys  (Meleagrididae)  in Latin America; 
pheasants ( Phasianidae) in Asia; the common duck (Anas) in Europe; and geese ( Anser) in 
Asia. 
 Flock composition is determined by the objectives of the poultry enterprise (see Chapter 1). 
In Nigeria for example, the preference is for the smooth-feathered, multicoloured native 
chickens or Muscovy ducks. Multicoloured feathers serve as camouflage for scavenging birds 
against predators, including birds of pr ey, which can more easily see solid colours (especially 
white). Foundation stock is usually obtained from the market as grower pullets and young 
cockerels. A hen to cock ratio of about 5:1 is common. Both sexes are retained for 150 to 300 
days, for the purposes of culling, selling, home consumption and gifts, most of which require 
adult birds. 
 In the last 50 years, there has been a great adv ance in the development of hybrid breeds for 
intensive commercial poultry production. This trend is most notic eable in chickens, turkeys and 
ducks. The new hybrids (those of chickens in particular) are widely distributed and are present 
in every country in the tropics, even in the mo st remote villages. The hybrids have been 
carefully selected and specialised solely for the production of either meat or eggs. These end-
product-specialised hybrid strains are unsuitabl e for breeding purposes , especially for mixing 
with local village scavenger stock, as they have very low mothering ability and broodiness. 
 For the smallholder, keeping hybrids means considerable changes are required in 
management. These changes are expensive for the following reasons: 
x All replacement day-old chicks must be purchased. 
x Hatchery chicks require artificial brooding and special starting feed. 
x Hybrids require higher quality balanced feed for optimum meat and egg production. 
x Hybrids require more careful veterinary hygiene and disease management. 
x Egg-laying hybrid hens require supplementary artificial light (a steadily increasing day-
length up to 17 hours of total light per day) for optimum (profitable) egg production. 
The meat and eggs from intensively raised hybrid stock are considered by many traditional 
consumers to have less flavour, and the meat to have too soft a texture. Consumers will thus 
often pay a higher price for village-produced poultry meat and eggs. Thus for rural family 
poultry keepers, it is more appropriate to maintain and improve local birds to meet this demand. 
Chickens 
Chickens originated in Southeast Asia and were introduced to the rest of the world by sailors 
and traders. Nowadays, indigenous village chickens are the result of centuries of cross-breeding 
with exotic breeds and rand om breeding within the flock. As a result, it is not possible to 
standardize the characteristics and productive performance of indigenous chickens. 
 There is no comprehensive list of the breeds and varie ties of chickens  used by rural 
smallholders, but there is considerable information on some  indigenous populations from 
various regions. Most of this is based on feathe r colour and other easily measured body features 
(genetic traits), but more detailed data are becoming availab le. Examples of local chickens from 
different parts of the tropics are given in Table s 2.1 to 2.3 below. These evaluations were 
usually carried out under intensive management conditions in research stations, as the objective 
was to evaluate the local birds’ productivity. More recently, data on the performance of local 
8 Species and Breeds 
chickens under extensive management have become available, which makes it possible to 
compare performance under extensive and intensive systems (see Table 2.3). 
Table 2.1 Performance of local breeds in South Asia (intensively housed)
Traits           Desi Naked Neck Aseel Kadak-anath Black Bengal 
12 wk live wt (g)  544 629 640 NA 433 
Age at 1st egg (d) 208 NA 219 NA 200 
Eggs/hen/year 116 104 100 80 NA 
Egg wt (g) 46 45 51 39 49 
Fertility (%) 81 80 55 90 86 
Hatchability (%) 55 61 45 61 68 
Source: Acharya and Kumar, 1984. Desi means “local” (as in Bangladeshi) 
Characteristics such as adult body weight and egg weight vary considerably among indigenous 
chicken populations, although reproductive traits, such as the number of laying seasons per 
year, the number of eggs per clutch and hatchability are more consistent. Desi hens in 
Bangladesh range from 190 to 200 days of age at first egg (an easy measure of age-at-sexual-
maturity), and they lay 10 to 15 eggs per season in 3 to 4 clutches (3 to 4 times) per year, with a 
hatchability of 84 to 87 percent (percent of eggs set) (Haque , 1999). 
Table 2.2 Local chicken breeds of Ethiopia
Traits Tukur Melata Kei Gebsima Netch 
24 wk body wt (g) 960 1000 940 950 1180 
Age at 1st egg (d) 173 204 166 230 217 
Eggs/bird.yr 64 82 54 58 64 
Egg wt (g) 44 49 45 44 47 
Fertility (%) 56 60 57 53 56 
Hatchability (%) 42 42 44 39 39 
Source: Shanawany & Banerjee, 1991 as cited in Forssido, 1986; Australian Agricultural Consultancy 
and Management Company, 1984; Beker and Banerjee, 1990. 
Indigenous village birds in Ethiopia attain sexual maturity at an average age of seven months 
(214 days). The hen lays about 36 eggs per year  in three clutches of 12 to 13 eggs in about 16 
days. If the hen incubates her eggs for th ree weeks and then rears the chicks for twelve weeks, 
then each reproductive cycle lasts for 17 wee ks. Three cycles then make one year. These are 
very efficient, productive and essential traits for survival. 
Guinea fowl 
Guinea fowl are native to West Africa but are now found in many parts of the tropics, and are 
kept in large numbers under intensive systems in France, Italy, the former Soviet Union and 
Hungary. In India, guinea fowl are raised in parts of the Punjab (Shingari et al., 1994), Uttar 
Pradesh, Assam and Madhya Pradesh, usually in flocks of a few hundred birds. Guinea fowl are 
seasonal breeders, laying eggs only during the rainy season, under free-range conditions. They 
are very timid, roosting in trees at night, and although great walkers, they fly very little. 
 Guinea fowl thrive in both cool and hot conditions, and their potential to increase meat and 
particularly egg production in developing countries deserves better recognition. The first egg is 
normally laid at about 18 weeks of age, and unlike many indigenous birds (which produce a 
single clutch a year), guinea hens lay continuously until adverse weather sets in. In West Africa, 
laying is largely confined to the rainy season. Guinea hens under free-range conditions can lay 
Small-scale poultry production 9
up to 60 eggs per season, while well-managed birds under intensive management can lay up to 
200 eggs per year. The guinea hen “goes broody” (sits on eggs in the ne st) after laying, but this 
can be overcome by removing most of the eggs. A clutch of 15 to 20 eggs is common, and the 
incubation period for guinea fowl is 27 days. Domesticated guinea fowl under extensive or 
semi-intensive management in Nigeria were reported to lay 60 to 100 eggs with a fertility rate of 
40 to 60 percent. 
Table 2.3 Performance of local chicken breeds under scavenging and intensive management 
systems
System  Country Breed Body 
Wt (g) 
Egg
Nº
Egg
Wt (g) 
Scavenging 
 Africa Burundi Local 1 500 75 40 
    Mali Local 1 170 35 34 
    United Rep.Tanzania   Local 1 200 70 41 
 Asia Indonesia Kampung 2 000 35 - 
    Malaysia  Kampung  1 430 55 39 
    Bangladesh Local 1 140 40 37 
    Thailand  Thai 1 400 40 48 
    Thailand Betong 1 900 18 45 
    Thailand Samae 2 300 70 - 
 Latin America Dom. Rep.  Local 1 500 100 38 
    Bolivia Local 1 500 100 - 
Intensive  
 Africa Egypt  Fayoumi 1 354 150 43 
     Egypt Dandarawi  - 140 45 
    Egypt Baladi  1 330 151 40 
    Nigeria Local 1 500 125 36 
    United Rep. Tanzania Local 1 652 109 46 
    Uganda Local 1 500 40 50 
    Zambia Local 1 500 35 52 
 Asia Bangladesh  Desi  1 300 45 35 
    India Kadakanath 1 125 80 40 
    Indonesia Ayam Nunukan 2 000 150 48 
          Indonesia Ayam Kampung 1 350 104 45 
Sources: Compiled from Horst, 1989; Katule, 1991; Horst et al., 1996; Haque, 1999. 
Domesticated guinea fowl are of three principal varieties: Pearl, White and Lavender. The Pearl 
is by far the most common. It  has purplish-grey feathers regularly dotted or “pearled” with 
white. The White guinea fowl has pure white feathers while the Lavender has light grey feathers 
dotted with white. The male and female guinea fowl differ so little in appearance (feather colour 
and body weight [1.4 to 1.6 kg]) that the inexperienced farmer may unknowingly keep all males 
or all females as “breeding” stock. Sex can be distinguished at eight weeks or more by a 
difference in their voice cry. 
 Domesticated guinea hens lay more eggs under intensive management. French Galor guinea 
hens can produce 170 eggs in a 36-week laying period. For example, from a setting of 155 eggs, 
a fertility rate of 88 percent and hatchability of 70 to 75 percent, it is possible to obtain 115 
guinea keets (chicks) per hen. In deep litter or confined range conditions, a 24-week laying 
period can produce 50 to 75 guinea keets per hen. 
Table 2.4 Reproduction and egg characteristics of guinea fowl varieties
10 Species and Breeds 
Traits Variety 
            Pearl                       Lavender                      White 
Age at 1st egg (d) 196 217 294 
Eggs/hen/year 51 38 43 
Egg wt (g) 38 37 36 
Laying (d/yr) 155 114 92 
Fertility (%) 53 50 0.0 
Hatchability (%) 87 81 0.0 
Source: Ayorinde, 1987 and Ayorinde et al., 1984. 
Ducks
Ducks have several advantages over other po ultry species, in particular  their disease tolerance. 
They are hardy, excellent foragers and easy to herd, particularly in wetlands where they tend to 
flock together. In Asia, most duck production is closely  associated with wetlan d rice farming, 
particularly in the humid and subtropics. An added advantage is that ducks normally lay most of 
their eggs within the three hours after sunrise (compared with five hours for chickens). This 
makes it possible for ducks to freely range in the rice fields by day, while being confined by 
night. A disadvantage of ducks (relative to othe r poultry), when kept in confinement and fed 
balanced rations, is their high feed wastage, due to the shovel-shape of their bill. This makes 
their use of feed less efficient and thus their meat and eggs more expensive than those of 
chickens (Farrell, 1986). Duck feathers and feather down can also make an important 
contribution to income. 
 Different breeds of ducks are usually grouped into three classes: meat or general purpose; 
egg production; and ornamental. 
 Ornamental ducks are rarely found in the family poultry sector. Meat breeds include the 
Pekin, Muscovy, Rouen and Aylesbury. Egg br eeds include the brown Tsaiya of Taiwan 
Province of China, the Patero Grade of the Philippines, the Indian Runner of Malaysia and the 
Khaki Campbell of England. All these laying br eed ducks originate from the green-headed 
Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos platyrhynchos).  The average egg production of the egg breeds is 
approximately 70 percent (hen.day basis). The Indian Runner, Khaki Campbell, Pekin and 
Muscovy are the most important breeds in rural poultry. 
The Indian Runner 
This is a very active breed, native to Asia, and id eal for free-range. It is a very good egg layer 
and needs less water than most other breeds, requiring only a basin in which it can immerse its 
beak up to the nostrils. It is the most graceful and elegant of all ducks on land with its upright 
carriage and slim body. It stands at an angle of about 80 q to the ground but when startled can be 
almost perpendicular. 
The Khaki Campbell 
Originally bred in England, this breed is derived from three breeds: the wild Mallard, the Rouen 
and the Indian Runner. The female has an overall khaki colour, and the male has a bronze-green 
head. The female is best known for her prolific egg laying ability, with an average of 90 percent 
(on a hen/day basis) with an average 73 gram egg weight. 
The Pekin 
Originally bred in China, this attractive meat breed is favoured by commercial producers 
throughout the world. It is large and meaty with an upright stance and a broad round head. It has 
white to lemon-yellow plumage and a yellow skin. It is hardy, a reasonable layer, and grows 
rapidly. Although timid, it is docile and easily confined by low fences. It is well suited to both 
large, specialized duck farms and smallholdings. Pekin ducks are the major meat duck breed in 
Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and China. 
Small-scale poultry production 11
The Muscovy 
This is not genetically a duck or a goose, bu t is more similar to the goose (Anseridae). It eats 
grass, as do geese, and has a similarly long  egg incubation period of 36 days (compared with 
that of ducks - 28 days). It is popular in areas where there is little wetland rice production, since 
it does not require swimming water. The female Muscovy is an excellent brooding mother. It is 
often used as a foster brooder-mother for other species such as ducks, chickens and guinea 
fowls. It is a poor layer, producing only 30 to 40 eg gs per year under ex tensive management. 
The male Muscovy can become very large (4.5 to 5.5 kg) while the female is smaller (2.3 to 2.8 
kg). The feather colouring is usually a combination  of black and white, ranging from mostly 
black to mostly white. The male has characteristic red fleshy outcrops around the eyes called 
caruncles. The Muscovy is the predominant waterfowl in Africa and Latin America, as it thrives 
well under free-range conditions. Numbers are increasing in parts of Asia where lean, red meat 
is popular (Hahn et al.,  1995). When mated with breeds of domestic ducks, they produce 
infertile hybrid offspring (“mule” ducks). These mule ducks are a major source of duck meat in 
Taiwan Province of China. A three-way cross-system is used for white mule duck production. 
Firstly, Pekin drakes are crossed with white Tsaiya ducks to produce a cross-bred female line 
called the Kaiya duck. These are then crossed with large white Muscovy drakes, usually by 
artificial insemination. The resulting progeny is a mule duck, which is sterile but grows rapidly. 
It has good carcass composition with more meat and less fat than the Pekin. These three-way 
crosses have the added advantages of the high egg production of the Tsaiya, the high growth 
rate of the Pekin and the good carcass quality and meat te xture of the Muscovy. Their white 
feathers are more valuable as down than those of darker-feathered ducks. 
Table 2.5 Duck breeds and their traits 
Breed Feather Colour Body weight (kg) 
      Drake                    Duck 
Egg colour 
Pekin White 4.1 3.6 White / Blue green 
Muscovy Black/White 4.5 3.0 White / Green cream 
Indian Runner White 2.0 1.8 White / Creamy white 
Khaki Campbell Brown/Khaki 2.0 1.8 White 
Mallard “ 1.4 1.1 Blue green / Mottled 
Source: Hahn et.al., 1995 
In most tropical countries, there are local duck breeds that have been selected to suit local 
conditions. They may not perform as well as improved breeds, but they do have the ability to 
survive and produce well under local extensive and semi-intensive systems. Setioko (1997) 
described three Indonesian ducks: Tegal, Alabio and Bali. Improved genotypes have been 
introduced and have either been crossed with local ducks or remained reasonably pure. There 
was some concern about the ability of the improved genotypes to survive under traditional 
farming systems. Trials conducted in the Mekong River Delta by The Bin (1996) found that 
hybrid ducks raised for meat in rice fields were more profitable than the local ducks, even 
though they consumed more feed and cost more to buy initially. However, when raised for egg
production in rice fields and on canals, the hybrids did not perform as well as the local ducks.  
Geese 
Geese are less important in family poultry production, except in China, where mainly local 
breeds are kept, except for a few European breeds such as the Toulouse and White Roman, 
imported for cross-breeding purposes. The great variety in breed size of geese permits their use 
under various management conditions. At the less intensive levels of production preferred by 
most family producers, smaller-sized birds (weighing approximately 4 kg, such as the Lingxhian 
or Zie breeds in China) are easier to manage. Geese are high in the broodiness trait, and have a 
consequent low egg production of 30 to 40 hatc hing eggs (in three to five laying cycles) per 
12 Species and Breeds 
year. At the other extreme are breeds of high fertility (and egg number), which are smaller and 
are selected specifically for use in breeding flocks for their lack of broodiness. Breeds such as 
the Zie may lay 70 to 100 eggs annually. The im portance of the wide gene pool variety in China 
is significant for the Asian region in particular and for the world in general. 
Pigeons
Pigeons are scavengers (not fed any supplementary  feed) in most countries, living on the roofs 
of houses and treated as “pets” that do not need to be fed. They appear to prefer homestead 
compounds to fields. In some countries, they are eaten only for ritual purposes. They normally 
lay two eggs in a clutch, and the young birds (squ abs) hatch after 16 to 17 days. The growing 
squabs are fed by their mothers on crop milk , produced in the mother’s crop (first stomach). 
This enables young squabs to grow very rapidly. They reach maturity in three to five months at 
a body weight of 200 to 300 g for males, and 15 0 g for females. Adult pigeons are monogamous 
for life. 
 Local pigeons are specific to different regions in the tropics. Africa has five breeds, within 
which Chad has three local breeds. Asia and the Pacific have five breeds, with local breeds 
found specific even to the Cook Islands. Latin America and the Caribbean islands have only one 
breed. Europe has six breeds, two of which come from Belgium. 
Turkeys 
These birds are native to Latin America. The breeds kept by rural producers in the tropics 
usually have black feathers, as distinct fr om the white-feathered breeds that are raised 
intensively. Where there are no geese and ostriches, they are the largest birds in the farming 
system. Body weight ranges from 7 to 8 kg in males and from 4 to 5 kg in hens. They have good 
meat conformation, produce about 90 eggs per year and have medium to good hatchability. 
They are more susceptible to disease than either chicken or ducks. 
Small-scale poultry production 13
Chapter 3 
Feed Resources 
INTRODUCTION 
A regular supply of low-cost feed, over and above maintenance requirements, is essential for 
improved productivity in the three farming systems used in family poultry production: 
x free-range – poultry roost in trees at night; 
x backyard – poultry are confined at night;  and 
x semi-intensive – poultry are enclosed during the  day in a very limited scavenger resource 
base. 
When feed resources are inadequate, a fe w birds in production are better than more birds just 
maintained, but without enough food for production. 
Extensive Systems 
Farmers attempt to balance stock numbers according  to the scavenging feed resources available 
in the environment in each season. Under the  free-range and backyard systems, feed supplies 
during the dry season are usually inadequate for any production above flock-maintenance level. 
When vegetation is dry and fibrous, the scavenging resources should be supplemented with 
sources of minerals, vitamins, protein and energy. Under most traditional village systems, a 
grain supplement of about 35 g per hen per day is given. 
 There have been various approaches to utilising a wider base of feed resources for the flock. 
One is the use of poultry species apart from chicken. Waterfowl, especially ducks, may be 
distributed throughout the wetland rural areas, where they can feed on such resources as snails 
and aquatic plants in ponds and lagoons. Another approach is the integration of poultry with the 
production of rice, vegetables, fish and other  livestock. An example is the combination of 
chicken with cattle, as practised by the Fulani of Nigeria, where the chickens feed on the ticks 
on the cattle as well as on the maggots growing in the cattle dung. Chickens raised in the cattle 
kraal (compound) weighed an average of 500 g more than those in the same neighbourhood but 
outside the kraal (Atteh and Ologbenla, 1993). 
Semi-Intensive System 
Under the semi-intensive system, all the nutrients required by the birds must be provided in the 
feed, usually in the form of a balanced feed purchased from a feed mill. As these are often 
expensive and difficult to obtain, smallholders use either unconventional feedstuffs or “dilute” 
the commercial feed by supplementing it with grain by-products (which supply energy and 
some protein). A well-balanced feed however is difficult to achieve, as grains and plant protein 
sources (the by-products of a few oil seeds) are becoming increasingly unavailable for livestock, 
and premixed trace minerals and vitamins are usua lly too expensive for smallholders. 
Phosphorus and calcium can be obtained from ashed (burnt and crushed) bones; and calcium 
from snail shells, fresh or seawater shellfish shells, or limestone deposits. Salt to supply sodium 
can come from evaporated seawater or land-based rock salt deposits. These mineral sources are 
rarely used. Feed provided for birds kept under this system is therefore of a much poorer quality 
(unbalanced by dilution with crop by-products) than under either the extensive or fully intensive 
system. 
AVAILABLE FEED RESOURCES 
The size and productivity of the village flock ultimately depend on the human population and its 
household waste and crop residues, and on the availability of other scavengable feed resources. 
There is a clear relationship between egg production and nutrient intake. This is demonstrated in 
Feed Resources 14
Bangladesh, where fewer eggs are laid in the rainy season from August to September, but when 
snails are available in January and February, production increases (ter Horst, 1986). A list of 
feed resources available to smallholders was compiled from surveys undertaken in Nigeria 
(Sonaiya, 1995). These feedstuffs were mostly by-products of home food processing and agro-
industries, and were similar to those found in other tropical countries. 
 The Scavengable Feed Resources Base (SFRB) include: 
x household cooking waste; 
x cereal and cereal by-products; 
x roots and tubers; 
x oilseeds; 
x trees, shrubs (including Leucaena, Calliandra and Sasbenia) and fruits; 
x animal proteins;  
x aquatic plants (Lemna, Azolla and Ipomoea aquatica); and, 
x commercially prepared feed. 
 These resources are described in greater detail in the following section. 
The Scavengeable Feed Resource Base 
Gunaratne et al. (1993; 1994), Roberts an d Senaratne (1992), Roberts et al. (1994) and Roberts 
(1999) have researched and classified the feed resources available for scavenging poultry in 
Southeast Asia, which they named the Scavengeable Feed Resource Base (SFRB). The SFRB 
was defined as the total amount of food produc ts available to all scave nging animals in a given 
area. It depends on the number of households, the types of food crops grown and their crop 
cultivating and crop processing methods, as well as on the climatic conditions that determine the 
rate of decomposition of the food products. Seasonal fluctuations in the SFRB occur due to 
periods of fallow or flooding, cultivation, harvesting and processing. The SFRB includes 
termites, snails, worms, insects, grain from sowing , harvesting by-products, seeds, grass, fodder 
tree leaves, water-plants and non-traditional feed materials. The SFRB can only be harvested by 
scavenging animals, of which poultry are the most versatile, although this varies with species. 
Several types of poultry scavenging together can make more effective use of this resource. 
 Keeping poultry under the free-range and backyard systems depends to a large degree on the 
quality of the feed available from scavenging. Therefore it is essential to know what feed 
resources are available. For example: a flock of 12 young growing chickens with five 
productive hens have access to an SFRB of 450 g (dry weight) containing nine percent protein 
and 2 300 kcal of metabolizable energy (ME)/kg. This supports about 22 percent daily egg 
production, with about three eggs/clutch, assuming 80 percent of the SFRB was utilized. 
Methods of estimating SFRB  
The value of the SFRB can be estimated by weighing the amount of daily food 
product/household waste generated by each family as parameter “H”, which is then divided by 
the proportion of food product/household wast e found in the crop of the scavenging bird 
(assessed visually) as pa rameter “p” (Roberts, 1999). This is then multiplied by the percentage 
of households that keep chickens (parameter “c”): 
 SFRB = H/p(c) 
 For example, an SFRB measured using the above method in Southeast Asia ranged from 300 
to 600 g on a Dry Matter (D M) basis, containing eigh t to ten percent of vegetable protein and 
8.8 to 10.4 megajoules (MJ) of metabolisable energy (ME) per kg (2 100-2 500 kilocalories 
[kcal] ME per kg) (Prawirokusumo, 1988; Gunaratne et al. , 1993 and 1994). The amount of 
protein and ME in the SFRB was determined by analysis of the crop content. In Sri Lanka, the 
annual SFRB available to each family was calculated to contain 23 kg of Crude Protein (CP) 
and 1959 MJ of ME (468 mega [M] cal of ME) (Gunaratne et al., 1993).
Small-scale poultry production 15
 In a case study conducted in Sri Lanka, collections of daily waste from 34 households were 
made on 14 occasions (Gunaratne  et al ., 1993). The collections were weighed, examined and 
analysed for approximate composition, calcium and phosphorus. Fifteen scavenging hens were 
collected late in the morning and slaughtered and their crop and gizzard contents examined and 
weighed. 
 The results indicated that the fresh weight of food produc t/household waste per household 
averaged 460 ±210 g per day and consisted of: 
x 26 percent cooked rice; 
x 30 percent coconut residue; 
x  8 percent broken rice;  and 
x 36 percent other (vegetable trimmings, egg shells, bread, dried fish and scraps). 
 The crop contents are shown below after Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1 Calculated values of SFRB for family flocks in different countries of Southeast Asia
Country SFRB as kg DM/year Source 
Indonesia 475 Kingston and Creswell, 1982 
Thailand 390 Janviriyasopak et al., 1989 
Sri Lanka 195 Gunaratne et al., 1993 
Sri Lanka 197 Gunaratne et al., 1994 
Source: Gunaratne et al., 1993.  
The crop contents comprised: 
x 72 percent household waste; 
x 13 percent grass; 
x 8 percent animal matter (earthworms, snails, ants and flies); and  
x 7 percent paddy rice.  
For composition details of crop contents and fo od/products household waste, see Table 3.2 
below. 
 Each family flock had access to the food product/household waste from two households, so 
that on average the amount available to the household flock was 550 g of Dry Matter per day. 
Daily egg production ranged from 11 to 57 percent, with an average of 30 percent. This did not 
vary significantly over the 12 months of the stud y. Chicken body weight at 20 days ranged from 
41 to 100 g, and at 70 days from 142 to 492 g. Mortality up to 70 days was 65 percent. Losses 
were attributed to predators, particularly dogs, cats, mongo oses, crows and other birds of prey. 
More than 90 percent of the hen’s day was sp ent scavenging over a radius of 110 to 175 m. 
Cattle and goat pens were favourite scavenging areas. 
Table 3.2 Average composition of major feed components and crop content of scavenging hens 
in Sri Lanka 
Component DM   CP   EE   CF  Ash   Ca   P 
Percent mg/g 
Food product /household 
waste
43.2 10.3 7.2 2.2 1.4 0.8 4.0 
Coconut residue 24.1 6.9 38.1 8.9 1.1 1.1 6.0 
Broken rice 89.9 9.0 1.3 1.5 3.2 0.5 1.4 
Crop content 34.4 9.4 9.2 5.4 16.0 0.8 0.9 
Source: Gunaratne et al., 1993 and 1994 
Feed Resources 16
Factors affecting the SFRB  
Among the factors determining the size of the SFRB are: climate; number of households; 
number and type of livestock owned; crops grow n; and the religion of the household. This was 
clearly illustrated in a Sri Lankan study (Gunaratne et al., 1994), where results showed that the 
total biomass of the scavenging population was proportion al to the SFRB. If the available SFRB 
is exceeded, then production falls (birds die and hens lay fewer eggs). If there is a surplus SFRB 
(such as a good harvest or fewer birds due to disease or stock sale), then production increases 
(more chicks and growers survive and more eggs are laid). Hence the SFRB available in a 
community determines the production potential of the poultry. If the  SFRB is known, other 
factors affecting production can be identified and the benefits of providing additional inputs 
assessed. 
Table 3.3 Amount of household waste, calculated SFRB and average flock biomass
Location - 
Village name 
Month House waste 
DM (g) 
SFRB 
DM (g)   CP (g) 
Flock biomass 
CP (g) 
Galgamuwa I March 143 260 20 91 
Galgamuwa I Sept 267 834 78 75 
Galgamuwa II March 543 639 63 83 
Galgamuwa II Sept 549 603 49 36 
Ibbagamuwa June 414 575 56 57 
Ibbagamuwa August 307 365 43 48 
Source: Gunaratne et al., 1994
The maximum productive size of the village flock depends on the SFRB. To keep the flock size 
in balance with the available SFRB, it is necessary to set fewer eggs for incubation, cull 
unproductive birds and sell stock as soon as they are saleable. Produc tion capacity should also 
be adjusted to match the seasonal variations in the SFRB. For example, during harvest time, 
when the SFRB is increased, extra chicks and growers may be reared, but at the end of the dry 
season birds may need to be culled , sold or consumed. Supplementing the available SFRB with 
other feed resources can improve the overall quality of the nutrition of the flock and reduce 
chick mortality. This may then result in more and larger growers, and the expanded flock could 
then exceed the SFRB. If this happens, then production will fall again until the balance is 
restored. Feed supplements are only beneficial if they result in incr eased off-take rather than 
increased flock size. 
FEED INGREDIENTS 
The on-line and CD-ROM versions of the FAO searchable database Feeds and Feeding provide 
a full resource on this topic for all types of livestock, including poultry. The following 
descriptions may supplement the above source. 
Cereals and cereal by-products 
Examples of grains for supplementing scavenging poultry include millet, sorghum, maize, and 
rice in the form of whole and broken grains. 
 Amounts supplied are inadequate when using the surveyed estimate of 35 g supplement 
grain/bird.day (Obi and Sonaiya, 1995). This and the tannin content of sorghum have led to a 
search for alternative grains and the evaluation of agro-industrial by-products. 
Dehulled rice grain 
This can be used with vegetable and animal prot ein supplements for all types of poultry. Rough 
or paddy rice, off-coloured rice and broken rice have been used up to 20 to 30 percent in poultry 
rations. Rice bran has a moderate quality protein of 10 to 14 percent, approximately 10.4 MJ of 
Small-scale poultry production 17
ME/kg (2 500 kcal of ME/kg), and about 11 percent Crude Fibre (CF). It is rich in phosphorus 
and B vitamins. Because of its high oil content (14 to 18 percent) it easily goes rancid. For this 
reason it should make up no more than 25 percent of the ration. This also applies to rice 
polishings. Rice bran  usually includes rice polishings, but is often adulterated with rice 
hulls/husks, which are very high in fibre and silicon, and have a low nutritive value. 
Nevertheless, rice bran is still an important feed resource. 
Maize starch residue (MSR) 
This is a by-product of the extraction of starch from fermented, wet-milled maize, which is used 
as a breakfast cereal in West Africa. It usually has more than 16 percent Crude Protein, although 
the amount varies according to the maize variety and processing method. 
By-products from local breweries and other local industries  
Brewer’s grain and yeast have become common ingredients for poultry ra tions, but the process 
of drying the wet by-product can be very expensive. 
Legumes and legume by-products 
Non-traditional legumes, such as boiled jack bean ( Canavalia ensiformis ) and sword bean 
(Canavalia gladiata ), have been shown to be acceptable to laying hens, although they should 
not form more than ten percent of the ration because the sword bean is of low nutritive value 
(Udedibie, 1991). Winged bean ( Phosphocarpus tetragonolobus ) contains approximately 
40 percent Crude Protein and 14 percent oil, and its overall nutritive value is very similar to that 
of soybean and groundnut cake for broiler meat chicken (Smith et al., 1984). Winged bean leaf 
foliage is also acceptable to laying hens. Unless the plant is grown with stake supports, the yield 
is very low, which makes its cultivation on a large scale less economical. However it is suitable 
as a feed and fodder crop for smallholder poultry. 
Soybean (Glycine max) 
This crop is being grown incr easingly for human consumption. If the cotyledons (fleshy beans) 
are used for human food, the testa (bean-seed coat)  is given to poultry . Raw soybeans heat-
treated by boiling for 30 minutes and then fed to scavenging birds in amounts of up to 35 
percent of the ration resulted in satisfactory performance in broilers and laying hens. In pullets 
and layers fed raw soybeans with no heat trea tment as 12 percent of the ration, there was a 
significant reduction in body weight at 20 weeks, as well as a delay of four days in the onset of 
sexual maturity (as measured by age at the 50 percent egg production). The heat treatment 
destroys a trypsin (a digestive enzyme present in the intestine of poultry) inhibitor, which, if left 
intact, prevents digestion of raw soybean. 
Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) 
This legume crop is grown solely for human consumption in Africa. Its by-products, especially 
the testa (seed coat), are used as a feed for small ruminants and have also been fed to poultry 
(Sonaiya, 1995). The testa represents about six percent of the weight of the whole cowpea, but 
is usually discarded (i n West Africa) when the cotyledons are made into a puree for a locally 
popular fried cake. With its crude protein content of 17 percent, its apparent metabolizable 
energy (AME) value of 4.2 MJ of AME/kg (100 5 kcal AME/kg) and its mineral profile (44 g 
ash/kg; 9.0 mg Ca/g; 0.9 mg P/g), cowpea testa should be a good feed resource, but the presence 
of tannin (53 mg/g) and trypsin inhibitor (12.4 units/mg) limits its utilization. Cowpea testa 
should not make up more than ten percent of the total feed of a poultry ration. 
Feed Resources 18
Roots and tubers 
Cassava (Manihot esculenta)  
This is grown in large quantities in Africa, Asia and Latin America, both for human 
consumption and as a livestock feed. Cassava and  its by-products (in the form of leaves, small 
tubers, pulp, peels, chaff, gari [fermented grated tubers], gari sievings, whole fermented roots 
and ensiled cassava meal) are used. The dried chips are high in energy and fibre but low in 
protein. In regions where cassava is used for human food, the peels are the most useful part of 
the cassava plant for feeding livestock. Amounts of 20 to  45 percent cassava peel meal (CPM) 
have been fed to chickens, but its use is limited because of the high content of the poison 
hydrogen cyanide (HCN), as well as high Crude Fibre, low protein content and dust. There is a 
considerable range of HCN levels in cassava, according to variety. When cassava completely 
replaces grains in a ration, there is a consequent reduction in egg weight and a change in egg 
yolk colour. Whether or not there are negative effects on egg fertility and hatchability is not 
known. Cassava meal gives good growth in meat  chickens, although protein and other nutrients 
must be carefully balanced. Molasses or sugar may be added to sweeten the bitterness of the 
cyanide and thus improve palatability. Oilseeds such as full fat soybean can compensate for the 
high fibre and low protein content and for the  dustiness. To remove the cyanide, detoxification 
methods include ensiling, sun-drying, air-drying, roasting, boiling and soaking. For 
smallholders, the most practical method is sun-drying (Sonaiya and Omole, 1977). Palm oil can 
also moderate the effects of cyanide on poultry . Some “sweet” varieties of cassava (which do 
not contain cyanide) are used in human food preparation, and these are often fed to poultry, 
particularly ducks. 
Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) 
Dried sweet potato forming up to 35 percent of the ration has been fed successfully to broilers 
and layers. The tubers are boiled before use, which overcomes any problems with dust or fungal 
growth from storage. 
Oilseeds 
Oilseeds in full-oil or partly oil-extracted form are a source of both energy and protein for 
extensive and intensive poultry systems.  
Cotton (Gossypium spp.)  
Glanded cotton seed cake (CSC) is a high-demand supplement fed to ruminants, but if available 
it can be fed in amounts up to 25 percent in the diets of layers and broilers without adversely 
affecting egg production and growth (Branckaert, 1968). Poultry are tolerant of the gossypol 
found in CSC, but it can cause an olive discolo uration of egg yolks, which consumers do not 
like. Addition of 0.25 percent ferrous sulphate should be added routinely to laying hen rations 
containing up to ten percent CSC. 
Sesame (Sesamum indicum) 
The feed consumption and conversion rates for bi rds fed various forms of raw unhulled sesame 
seeds were better than those for birds fed dehulled but whole sesame seeds, confirming the 
practice of smallholders who use whole sesame seeds as a supplement for scavenging poultry. 
Sesame seeds should used in amounts between 20 and 35 percent of the ration. 
Groundnuts (Arachis hypogaea) 
Groundnuts may be used in the oil-extracted cake form to make up 8 to 24 percent of the ration. 
Mouldy groundnuts may contain toxic substances, the most dangerous of which is aflatoxin. 
Coconut (Cocos nucifera) 
Coconut meal can be used to form 50 percent of the ration, especially when combined with a 
high-energy source such as cassava meal. It is low in lysine, isoleucine, leucine and methionine. 
Small-scale poultry production 19
Sunflower (Helianthus Annuus) 
Sunflower seeds can be fed whole, or the decor ticated meal can be used to replace groundnut 
cake and soybean meal and up to two-thirds of fishmeal. It has the highest sulphur amino acid 
content of all the major oilseeds. 
Oil Palm (Elaeis guineensis) 
Most oil palms are processed locally. The by-pr oducts are kernels and an aqueous solution of 
oil, fibre and solids. This solution can be filtered to remove the fibre (which is used as fuel). 
This leaves an aqueous mixture called palm oil sludge (POS ), which supplies feed energy and 
fatty acids. Sludge processed using chemical solvents should not be used, as the chemical 
residue may be toxic to the birds. It can be fermented and used in smallholder poultry systems 
or dried to form up to 40 percent of commercial compound feeds (Hutagalang, 1981). Palm 
kernels are processed locally into palm kernel oil by heat or cold-water extraction. The residue 
from heat extraction is similar to ash and of no use in  poultry feed, but the residue from water 
extraction is very nutritious and palatable to birds, and can be used in the same way as 
groundnut cake. The meal can provide up to 30 percent of the ration. However, the product is 
low in the sulphur amino acids. 
Soybean – see under Legumes and legume by-products 
Other oilseeds  
Other oilseeds that have been fed to poultry under research conditions include rubber, amaranth, 
Niger seed ( Nueg), breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) , locust bean (Ceratonia siliqua), African oil 
bean, melon, mango and castor oil. Okra seed (Hibiscus esculentus) has not yet been evaluated 
as a protein source for poultry, and although it is lower in protein, it compares favourably with 
soybean in all other nutrient components. Since ok ra is widely grown by smallholders and the 
seeds are kept for planting, it may be a potential source of protein for smallholder poultry. 
Bambara groundnut (Voandzeia subterranea)  
This is a good source of protein with a high ly sine content. As the nut is not widely eaten, the 
plant is grown mainly as a mulch crop and the foliage is scavenged by poultry. 
Trees, shrubs and fruits  
Neem leaves  
A pilot study was undertaken to test the response of three groups of layers to neem leaves. One 
group was fed a ration containing ten per cent fr esh neem leaves, the second a ration of ten per 
cent dried neem leaves, and the third none. Th e group receiving the fresh neem leaves had 
increased feed intake, daily egg production and egg weigh t compared with the other two. There 
appears to be a fat component of fresh neem leaves (Azadirachta indica) that enhances egg 
production and egg weight (Siddiqui et al., 1986).  
Coffee pulp 
This is high in fibre, but as the essential amino acid content is similar to  that of s oybean, it can 
only be used in limited amounts. 
Citrus pulp 
No more than two percent citrus pulp should be included in the ration to avoid reduction in 
growth rate and off-colour egg yolks. 
Over-ripe bananas and plantains 
These are of greater palatability for poultry than green bananas, which contain free or active 
tannins.
Feed Resources 20
Derinded sugarcane pith and molasses  
Sugarcane juice can make up to 25 percent of the poultry ration and molasses up to 30 percent, 
but it should be noted that over ten percent molasses results in watery faeces. Raw sugar 
however can be fed at up to 50 percent of the ration without watery faeces. Combining one part 
molasses with three parts sugar gives good production without the digestive problems. Molasses 
is often added to rations at low levels of inclusion to make it more palatable, although there may 
be problems with even ly mixing the liquid, and with fungal toxins in the stored feed, 
encouraged by the sugar levels. 
Table 3.4 Optimum levels of inclusion in poultry rations of some ingredients 
Feedstuff Optimum level in the diet  
(%) 
Banana meal 5-10 
Citrus molasses 5-10 
Citrus pulp 1-2 
Cocoa bean residue 2-7 
Cocoa husk 6-15 
Cocoa shell 5-15 
Coconut meal/cake 5-15 
Coffee grounds 3-5 
Coffee pulp 3-5 
Kapok seed cake  5-10 
Leucaena leaf meal 2-5 
Oil-palm sludge, dried 10-30 
Oil palm sludge, fermented 20-40 
Palm kernel meal 10-40 
Palm oil 2-8 
Rubber seed meal 10-30 
Sugar cane molasses 10-30 
Raw sugar 40-50 
Sugar cane juice 10-25 
Source: Hutagalung, 1981 
Animal protein 
Blood meal 
This is recognized as a high crude protein source with an imbalanced, relatively poor amino acid 
profile. Hand ling and processing of blood is difficult in low-technology situations. For 
processing small amounts, one method is to absorb the blood on a vegetable carrier such as 
citrus meal, brewers grain, palm ke rnel, ground maize, cob rice or wheat bran, after which the 
material is spread out for drying on trays heated fr om below or placed in the sun (Sonaiya, 
1989). At the farm le vel, the blood may be supplied from the slaughter of livestock. Abattoirs 
and slaughterhouses provide large volumes of blood for making up feeds at the commercial 
level.
Termites 
Farina, et al.,  (1991) described a technique used to  collect termites for scavenging poultry. 
Briefly, the straw of sorghum, millet and maize are chopped, placed in clay pots or calabashes 
and moistened. The mouth of the container is placed over a hole in a termite colony under 
Small-scale poultry production 21
construction. The container is covered with a jute sack to prevent drying out and a heavy stone 
is placed on it to secure it in position. After three to four weeks, a new colony of termites should 
be established inside the container. The eggs and larvae are particularly relished by chicks, 
guinea keets and ducklings, while adult birds also feed on the adult insects. Cattle dung can be 
used in place of the cereal straw. 
Maggots 
Alao and Sonaiya (1991) grew maggots on cowpea testa (seed coats) and monitored the 
chemical composition of the mixture over ten days. Cowpea testa samples were placed in a 
basket near a pit latrine to attract flies to lay eggs on them. Every two da ys, a sample was 
steeped in boiling water to kill the maggots. They were then sun-dried and ground before 
analysis. Results showed that the Crude Protein content of the mixture doubled by the second 
day. Soukossi (1992) produced maggots from fi brous vegetable material and poultry droppings. 
The method was developed for feeding fish, but can easily be adapted for smallholder poultry. 
A tank with a capacity of one cubic metre is filled with water to about 15 cm from the top. 
Dried stalks of maize, amaranth, groundnut, soya and other legumes are soaked in the water to 
which some poultry droppings are added. Flies and other insects are attracted to the soaked 
material to lay their eggs. After five to seven days, eggs  are hatched and lar vae are sufficiently 
developed to be fed to fish. Beyond this peri od the maggots develop into adult flies. It was 
observed that up to 50 percen t of the eggs laid by flies died if ex posed to the su n for several 
hours. A cover, at least for the hottest hours of the day, is therefore necessary. Similar trials 
have been carried out in Burkina Faso. 
Earthworms 
Vorster et al. (1992) produced earthworms as a source of protein for chicken feed. In an area of 
25 m
2, one kg of fresh earthworm biomass was produced daily. This is sufficient to supplement 
at least 50 chickens with high-quality protein. It must be noted, however, that earthworms (and 
snails as well) may be important vectors for tapeworms such as Davainea and Raillietina and 
also contain a growth inhibitor. 
Other animal products 
Aquatic animal products containing mineral sources include marine shells from mangrove 
oysters (Ostrea tulipa), mangrove periwinkles (Tympanostomus fuscatus) and clams, and shells 
from land snails. Mari ne shells are abundantly available in coastal areas. Snails and their shells 
are harvested from fore sts, but there is also on-going developmen t of productive snail farms. It 
is estimated that a box with a capacity of one cubic metre capacity on a snail farm can yield 40 
snails each year. Ducks are an important biolo gical control of the semi-aquatic golden snail in 
the Philippines and Bangladesh. Other marine by-products, such as prawn dust and shrimp 
heads, supply both minerals and protein. 
CONCLUSIONS 
There are feed resources available for feeding  poultry at all levels of production. Smallholders 
using the semi-intensive system who make their own feed must base the rations on home-
produced feed resources or obtain the ingredients locally. In backyard systems, available 
resources should be supplemented with appropriate nutrients as necessary. Food products from 
household waste fed to free-range birds should also be supplemented. Potential substitutes for 
expensive commercial feeds are cassava, sweet potato, coco yam (Colocasia esculenta),
arrowroot (Marantha arundinacea),  coconut residues, coconut oil, palm oil and other non-
traditional energy sources. Non-conventional feedstuffs which are good substitutes for fish meal 
and soybean and groundnut oil meals include earthworm meal, maggot meal, winged bean, 
pigeon pea, jack bean, Azolla (A. pinnata, A. caroliniana, A. microphylla) , leaf meals and leaf 
protein concentrates. 
 In different regions, the importance of these feed resources for family poultry depends on 
their availability in sufficient quantities for farm use, simple preparation and processing 
Feed Resources 22
methods, knowledge of the potential nutritive values and (for comparison) the price and 
availability of conventional commercial feeds. 
 For the family poultry situation with a scavenger flock, free-choice supplements with three 
containers each containing either protein-rich, energy-rich or mineral-rich feed sources will 
provide a solution to the problem of balancing nutrient intake for different age-groups. Poultry 
have an instinctual ability to select exactly what they need in the above food nutrient groups, 
and will not overeat from any one container. Young growing poultry (under two months of age) 
should always be fed in a “creep” system, wher e older stock cannot get access to their feed 
supply.  
Small-scale poultry production 23
Chapter 4 
General Management 
HOUSING AND RUNS 
Under undomesticated conditions, poultry lay eggs in simple nests, perch in trees and spend 
much of the day scavenging for feed. Chickens spend a large proportion of their time scratching 
to expose hidden food. Under the backyard and semi-intensive production systems, poultry are 
usually enclosed at night to discourage thieves an d predators, and under intensive production, 
are totally confined day and night. Some village households keep their few chickens inside the 
house or even under their bed at night, to discourage theft. 
 Given a choice of a place to lay their eggs, hens will choose a soft “litter” base, and they 
prefer an adequately sized (a cube of approximately 30 cm), darkened nest with some privacy. 
Prior to laying, hens usually investigate a number of possible sites before entering a nest box. 
They then show nesting behavio ur, which includes a special protective nest-seeking voice, after 
which they sit and finally lay. When they have laid an egg, they announce this with another type 
of “pride of achievement” call. These calls can also be heard in a battery cage house. If perches 
are provided, hens will perch most of the time rather than stand on the wire floors, and after 
dark most birds roost on the perches. Perch ing is a probable survival characteristic to avoid 
night predators. The basic requirements for poultry housing are: 
x space; 
x ventilation;
x light;  and 
x protection (from weather and predators). 
Space: density of birds per unit area 
This is the most important basic principle in housing, as the space available determines the 
number and type of poultry that can be kept. For example, a deep litter house measuring 6 m by 
11 m can hold 200 laying hens at a stock density of 3 birds/m 2 (3.6 ft 2/bird). Under the older 
system of measuring, stock density was measured in ft 2 per bird, which is the inverse of birds 
per m2 used in the metric system, incorporating a conversion factor of 0.0929 m 2/ft2 (for details, 
see the appendix entitled Abbreviations and Conversions). 
 Linear space or length of pe rch per bird is measured in centim etres. The recommended floor 
and perching space for the three main types of chicken is shown in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1  Requirement of chickens for floor and perch space 
Chicken types Floor Space 
(birds/m2)
Floor Space 
(ft2/bird) 
Perch Space  
(per bird) 
Layer 3 3.6 25 cm (10 in) 
Dual Purpose 4 2.7 20 cm (8 in) 
Meat 4-5 2.1-2.7 15-20 cm (6-8 in)  
    
Hen groups are comfortable at a stock density of three to four birds per square metre. If more 
space is allowed, a greater variety of behaviour can be expressed. Less space creates stressed 
social behaviour, allowing disease vulnerability and cannibalism and leaving weaker birds 
deprived of feed or perch space. Individual birds need more room for normal behaviour and 
adequate exercise than the 22 birds/m2 (0.5 ft2/bird) density currently used in commercial laying 
24 General management
cages. Over recent decades, animal welfare concerns have encoura ged research on laying cage 
structures to make designs better suited to the needs of hens, while retaining cost-effectiveness 
for production. 
Ventilation: air flow 
Ventilation is an important factor in housing. A building with open sides is ideal, otherwise 
cross-ventilation at bird-level should be allowed for in the form of floor level inlets, open in a 
direction to allow the prevailing wind to blow across the width of the building. An air mass 
between the side walls of a poultry house resists being moved, even across an open-sided 
building. The wider the building, the more the resistant it is to air movement. Buildings over 8 
m (26 ft) wide have a signifi cantly greater problem because of this inherent property of air to 
resist movement. It is recommended that buildings relying on natural airflow for ventilation 
should not exceed 8 m in width. 
 Heat stress is a significant constraint to successful production and can lead to death. 
Although birds can withstand several degrees below freezing, they do not tolerate temperatures 
over 40 qC. This depends on the relative humidity prevailing at the time. Poultry do not possess 
sweat glands and must cool themselves by panting out water in their breath, which is 
evaporative cooling. When the humidity is too high, this cooling mechanism does not work very 
well. Lethal temperatures for most chickens are 46 qC upwards, and severe stress sets in above 
40 qC. In temperate regions, the chicken house may be constructed to face the rising morning 
sun to gain heat. In the tropics however, an east-west orientation of the length of the building 
helps to minimize exposure to direct sunlight. Building materials such as tin or other metal 
should be avoided for this reason, although white paint will reflect up to 70 percent of incident 
solar heat radiation. Ventilation conc erns in building alignment may prevail over solar heat 
control in this aspect, as cross-flow ventilation requires the side of the building to face the 
prevailing wind. 
 Ground cover can also reduce reflected heat. Shade should be provided, especially if there is 
little air movement or if humidity is high. With no shade, or when confined in higher 
temperatures, poultry become heat stressed and irritable, and may begin to peck at one another. 
When new pinfeathers are growing (especially on  young stock), blood is easily drawn, which 
can lead to cannibalism. The effects of heat stress are: 
x a progressive reduction in feed intake as ambient temperature rises; 
x an increase in water consumption in an attempt to lower temperature; 
x a progressive reduction in growth rate;  and 
x disturbances in reproduction (lower eg g weight, smaller chicks, reduced sperm 
concentration and an increased level of abnormal sperm in cocks). 
Light: duration and intensity 
A well-lit house is essential. A dark house leads to lethargic, inactive, unproductive birds. Light 
is important for feeding, as poultry identify food by sight. This is especially important for 
intensively managed day-old chicks, which need very bright 24-hour lighting for their first week 
of life. 
 Light is also an important factor in sexual maturity. An increasing light proportion in the 
day, as naturally occurs from mid-winter to mid-summer, will accelerate sexual maturity in 
growing pullets, bringing them to lay sooner. If hens are already laying, the increasing light 
proportion will increase egg production. The opposite effect is also true: as the light proportion 
of the day decreases (as naturally occurs from mid-summer to mid-winter), then sexual maturity 
is slowed in growing stock, and egg production is reduced in laying hens. These effects are 
somewhat reduced towards the equator, as the difference in the daylight proportion of a day 
changes less and less. 
 This physiological effect on poultry is important in terms of maintaining egg production in 
commercial flocks, and requires supplementary lighting programmes. Regular and reliable 
Small-scale poultry production 25
electricity supply is required for such programmes, ot herwise the effect can be made worse by 
breaks in the light supplementation system. A slow but steady increase maximises the rate of 
production. However, lighting programmes producing an effective daylight proportion in excess 
of 17 hours per day can have a worsening effe ct on egg production. A 24-hour security lighting 
system can have such an effect on egg production. 
 Birds do best in situations where there is plenty of natural light that does not raise the 
temperature of the house. Natural light is preferable unless regular, reliable and well-distributed 
artificial light can be provided. It is recommended that the in terior of the house be whitewashed 
to reflect light. The intensity or brightness of the light is also important. Egg production will 
decrease at light intensities lower than five lux (the “lux” is the metric unit of light intensity and 
can be measured by a meter similar to that measuring light intake into a camera lens), although 
meat chicken will keep growing optimally at light intensities as low as two lux (not bright 
enough to read a newspaper). These intensities are measured at the eye-level of the bird, not 
near the light source. Unless supplementary lighting is spaced uniformly, there may be areas in 
the building insufficiently lit to allow optimum growth or egg production. Designs for layout 
assume that the light bulbs or tubes will be kept clean, as dusty surfaces will reduce light output. 
Protection: shelter sheds and buildings 
Many factors influence the type and choice of housing to protect poultry from the effects of 
weather and predators. These include the local c limate, the available space, the size of the flock 
and the management system. In extensive systems, birds must be protected from disease and 
predators but also be able to forage. Traditional large animal fencing using live plants is not 
enough protection against predators such as snakes, kites, rats and other vermin. 
 A simple and effective system to deter predator birds is to tie parallel lines of string across 
the main scavenging area, the intervals between which measure less than the predator’s 
wingspan; or, alternatively, a fishing net supported on poles can be spread across the side of the 
run where predator birds could swoop on the scavenging chicks. 
 Leg traps can be set for large predators. It is not necessary to set traps around all the pens, as 
predators tend to attack the same pen on the second night. Steel traps can be boiled in walnut 
hulls or cocoa pods, both to camouflage them and to prevent rust. The traps will be more 
effective if not touched with ba re hands, as most predators have a keen sense of smell. Instead, 
they should be handled with a stick, rubber gloves or tongs. 
 Rats, mongooses and snakes are only a problem when the birds are small. Rats often come 
up through the earth floors, and the first signs of a rat attack may be unusually quiet chicks 
huddled under the brooder heater or in a co rner, or dead chicks with small bloody neck 
scratches. Snakes will kill chicks if they can get into the brooder house. A treble fishhook in a 
dead bird can be left as bait: the snake will swallow the hooks as it gulps down the bird and 
eventually die. Holes around doors and windows through which rats and snakes may enter 
should be plugged. 
 Coops or baskets may be used to house mothe r hens and chicks in order to reduce chick 
mortality due to predators, thieves and rain. They also allow for separate feed and water 
supplementation, although the inadequate feed usually provided in coops means that some 
scavenging remains necessary. 
26 General management
Table 4.2  Predator attack modes and control methods 
Predator Attack mode Control method 
Hawk Picks up stray birds and weaklings. 
Attacks birds so that head and toe marks 
are visible on back. Often plucks birds. 
Hunt the hawk and keep chicks away from 
clear swoop areas. 
Rat, mongoose Usually take more than they eat, and 
stuff chicks in holes for later 
consumption. 
If allowed, use rat poison. 
Snake Will swallow eggs and chicks Use fishhooks. 
Dog, cat General destruction Try to catch them. Cats can control rats but 
wild cats and dogs are a problem. 
Fox, jackal Will bite off the feathers over the back 
and between wings, eat the entrails and 
breast, and carry bird to den. 
Roam in the early morning; kill for their 
young. Trapping is the best control. 
Raccoon Pulls off head and eats crop. Will carry 
birds off. 
May be protected in some countries. A permit 
to destroy may be required. 
HOUSING IN FREE-RANGE SYSTEMS 
Overnight shelter which is roomy, clean and air y should be provided under free-range systems. 
Houses may be either fixed or mobile. If space permits, a mobile chicken house may be 
appropriate, and to increase egg production, mobile folds or field units  for laying birds can be 
provided. These mobile units can be rotated on the range. Although housing is cheaper and there 
is less need for balanced rations, the birds are exposed to the sun and prone to parasite 
infestation.
 The stocking density on pasture should be calculated according to the soil type and pasture 
management system. A night shelter for up to 20 free-range chickens can be attached to any 
existing structure, such as the farmer’s outhouse, kitchen or dwelling. In a deep litter system, 
there should be a density of at most three to four birds per square metre. In regions where it 
rains heavily, the floor should be raised with a generous roof overhang, particularly over the 
entrance. The raised floor can be a solid platform of earth or a raised bamboo platform. The 
raised bamboo platform has the advantage of providing ventilation under the poultry, which 
helps cool them in hot weather and keeps them out of flood water in the monsoons. 
 The walls of the building can be made of mu d or bamboo, and the windows and door of 
bamboo slats. The house can also be free-standing, and may also be suitable for semi-intensive 
or intensive production systems.  
HOUSING IN SEMI-INTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE SYSTEMS  
Planning 
Complete confinement is only advisable where: 
x there is good management; 
x reproduction is spread equally over the year; 
x land is scarce or inaccessible all year round; 
x balanced rations are available; 
x a supply of hybrid day-old chicks is available; 
x labour is expensive; 
x parasite and disease control are readily available;  and 
x the objective is commercial production. 
The reasons for confinement are, in order of priority, to: 
x reduce mortality due to predation in chicks under two months of age; 
Small-scale poultry production 27
x achieve higher daily gain and better feed conversion in growers;  and 
x allow better supervision of production in laying hens. 
In all confined systems, the location and building design must be carefully considered. The area 
surrounding the house should be mown or grazed.  A good location should meet the following 
criteria:
x It should be easily accessible. 
x There should be a reliable water supply. 
x The ground should be well drained. 
x It should be at a sufficient distance from residential areas (far enough to protect human 
health and close enough to provide security for the birds). 
x It should be well away from woodland. 
Converting existing facilities can provide housing, although planning permission may have to 
be obtained. An unused outhouse  kitchen, for example, can be  converted into a poultry house. 
In all conversions, maximum use should be made of the space available through careful 
planning: 
x A plan of the building should be drawn to scale. 
x Use should be made of existing floors and walls, if suitable. 
x Space requirements of the birds and manure disposal should be taken into consideration. 
x A feasibility study should be carried out, taking into consideration future plans and 
requirements as well as the economics of converting the building. 
Construction 
The floor is extremely important. An ideal floor for a deep litter house is well drained and made 
of concrete, with a layer of heavy gravel or wire mesh embedded in it to keep out rats. This type 
of floor is usually costly. Wood, bamboo, bricks  or large flat stones (according to what is 
locally available) can be used, but are harder to clean. Clay floors are cheaper, but require the 
application of a fresh layer of clay either be tween flock batches or at least annually. In areas 
where construction materials are cheaper than deep litter, and particularly in humid regions 
where litter material is not available, raised floors are sometimes used. These are made of wire 
mesh, expanded metal, wooden slats or split bamboo, to allow the droppings to collect under the 
house, and should be about one metre above the ground to allow for cleaning and ventilation. 
Higher floors may result in an unstable building. They are supported by pillars, which are either 
rot-resistant or have stone or concrete footings, and which are made of such materials as wood, 
bamboo, oil drums and concrete blocks. Houses w ith raised floors on posts can be protected 
against rats with baffles. The baffles can be made of a metal collar, a tin can turned upside-
down or a metal band wound around the post, but must fit tightly to deter even the smallest 
rodent. 
 The roof and walls of the house can be made of any inexpensive local material, including 
bamboo slats, sorghum stalks, mud, wooden slats and palm fronds, as long as the structure is 
made relatively rat-proof. In colder regions , the walls should be thicker or insulated, but in 
warmer climates thatch can be used, although it should be replaced frequently to minimize 
parasite and disease problems. The inside of the walls should be as smooth as possible, to 
prevent tick and mite infestation and to make cleaning easier. Interior length-ways building 
partitions are not advisable, as they reduce cross-flow ventilation. 
 The roof should be watertight, and should overhang the walls by one metre if the windows 
have no shutters. The roof can be made of thatch, sheet metal or tiles. Thatch is usually the 
cheapest option and provides good insulation. It will probably have to be replaced every three 
years, or immediately if ticks get into it. It shoul d be interlaced with bamboo or wooden slats to 
keep predators out. Sheet metal is usually too expensive, and in hot climates must be painted 
with white or aluminium to reflect sun heat. However, it is easily cleaned which is an important 
advantage where ticks are a problem. A layer of plastic sheeting sandwiched between bamboo 
28 General management
slats is a good seal against rain and vermin. Fla ttened oil drums can be used at a lower cost. 
Although usually more expensive than thatch, sun- or oven-baked tiles will last much longer. 
Because of their weight, the frame for a tiled roof must be stronger than for other materials. 
 Window design depends on the local climate. Chickens need more ventilation than humans, 
but should be sheltered from wind, dust and rain. During storms, wood or bamboo hinged 
shutters or curtains made from feed sacks can cover window openings on the windward side of 
the house. In humid climates, window design should take as much advantage of the wind 
direction as possible to reduce the amount of moisture in the house. Window areas are best 
covered by wire mesh or expanded metal. Wooden  slats or bamboo can be used, depending on 
available funds and materials. However, the thicker the material, the more ventilation will be 
reduced. Doors should be made of metal, wood or bamboo. The top half of the door could be 
wire mesh. Doors should be sufficiently strong to withstand being opened and closed many 
times a year. 
 Gabled roofs reduce solar heat loading when compared with flat or lean-to roofs. The pitch 
or “angle of rise” on a gabled roof is important for many reasons. Traditional village thatched 
gabled roofs are usually constructed using bush timber, and at a steeply pitched angle (greater 
than 42° from the horizontal), which helps the ro of to withstand stormy  winds. Shallower 
pitched roofs are more susceptible to being blown off in strong winds, particularly when the 
pitch angle is 15° to 20°. Shallower pitched roof s have less roof surface area, which reduces the 
cost of surfacing material, but because they are more affected by stormy winds, they need 
stronger support frames, which results in a much higher overall roof cost. A 42° pitch is the 
optimum compromise between roof surfacing costs and roof support costs. 
 The maximum width for an open-sided poultry building, under conditions of a slight breeze, 
which allows air movement across the shed at the height of the bird, is 8 m (26 ft). To maximise 
the volume and velocity of airflow across the shed width, the end walls of the shed should be 
closed. This forces the air to flow across the sh ed width, especially if the wind is not already 
coming from that side. Centre ridge ventilation is not recommended, as it discourages airflow 
across the full shed width. Air enters at the prevailing wind side and is drawn up at the centre to 
exit at the ridge, excluding the other half of the building. 
Nests
To avoid excessive competition and minimize eggs laid on the floor, one nest should be 
provided for every five hens. If larger communal nests are used, at least one square metre per 50 
birds should be allowed. Baskets, pots and cardb oard boxes can be used for nests. Dimensions 
suitable for a basket or pot nest are a 25 cm base diameter, 18 cm high walls, and a 40 cm open 
top diameter. Nests should be situated in a secure,  shady secluded place out of the sun, lined 
with fresh litter and kept clean. Nest boxes for individual hens should be constructed in multiple 
groups for larger numbers of hens. These ar e usually made of wood, and should measure 
approximately 30 cm on all sides, with a nest floor area of about 0.1 m
2 .
Perches and roosts 
Chickens prefer to roost at night on perches. Perching space of 15 to 20 cm should be allowed 
for each bird. Birds lower in the social peck order can also use the perches during the day. The 
cross-section of each perch bar should be 2 to 3 cm. Their length depends upon the number of 
birds to be housed. The perches should be placed within a frame, and aligned parallel to the 
wall, and horizontally, with a sliding, removable platform called the “droppings board” about 
20 cm below the perches to catch the manure drop pings. The first perch bar should be placed 20 
to 25 cm out from the back wall, and subseque nt ones at 30 to 40 cm intervals. The droppings 
board should touch the back wall and extend 30 cm in front of the front perch bar, as this will 
allow the birds to land from their flight from the floor before seeking a perching spot. 
Droppings boards should be a maximum of 75 cm from the floor of the house, and the perch 
bars should be about 20 cm above the droppings board, to facilitate cleaning of the droppings 
board. Fowls deposit over half their droppings at night, and the use of the droppings boards thus 
helps to keep the floor clean. The manure can then be easily collected, dried and stored in empty 
Small-scale poultry production 29
feed sacks for use as an excellent fertilizer for plants requiring organic nitrogen. The area under 
the droppings board then becomes an ideal site for a communal nest. 
Providing feed 
In both intensive and se mi-intensive systems, laying hens need constant access to food and 
water, and feeders should be distributed even ly throughout the chicken house. In the semi-
intensive system, birds scavenge during the day, mostly for protein (from such sources as 
insects, worms and larv a), minerals (from sto nes, grits and shells), and vitamins (from leafy 
greens, oil palm and nuts), but energy supplements such as maize, sorghum and millet are 
important for higher productivity and should be  given. Chapter 3 on Feed Resources discusses 
ingredients and feeding systems in more detail. 
Feeders 
A good feeder should be:  
x durable enough to withstand frequent cleaning; 
x stable enough not to be knocked over; 
x of the correct height and depth; 
x bird proof (such that birds cannot get into it or roost in it);  and 
x equipped with a lip to prevent birds from spooning feed out onto the floor with their beaks. 
The height of the feed in side the feeder, which should never be more than one-third full, should 
be level with the back of the birds, to prevent them from scratching contaminated litter into the 
feeders and to limit feed wastage. This is achieved by adjusting the height of the feeder itself. 
To reduce spoilage and mould problems, feed should be supplied at sunrise and at about 14.00 
hours (or more frequently if the birds empty the feeder), with all feed finished by sundown. 
Feeders can be made of wood, sheet metal or bamboo, and are best suspended from the roof to 
keep rats out. The height of the feeder should be adjustable. Supplementary vegetable matter 
should be fed at beak level, either hanging from the ceiling wrapped in a string or placed in a 
net or placed in a floor-standing hopper with wire or slatted sides. It should not be thrown on 
the floor. 
 Feeder space is measured as the linear distance of lip available to the birds. This is either the 
circumference of a round tube-feeder tray or twice the length of a trough if the birds feed from 
both sides. If troughs are used, at least 10 cm of  feeding space should be accessible to each bird. 
When circular feeders are used, there should be at least 4 cm feeding space per bird. 
Table 4.3  Feed and feeder space requirements for 100 chickens 
Age  
(weeks) 
Daily feed 
consumption (kg) 
Suggested feeder depth 
(cm) 
Feeder space  
(m) 
1 – 4 1.4 - 5.0 5 2.5 
4 – 6 3.2 - 7.3 8 3.8 
6 – 9 5.0 - 9.5 9 6.1 
10 – 14 7.3 - 15.9 12.5 9.6 
15 and above 9.1 - 11.4 15 12.7 
Creep Feeders 
Creep feeders are used to enable baby chicks to have access (by “creeping” through a small 
doorway) to high-quality (high in energy and protein) feed, while blocking access to larger 
sized birds (especially the chicks’ mothers). The conical (open at the top and base) creep feeder 
can be made from split bamboo strips approximately 0.5 to 1 cm wide, bound at the joints with 
string or wire. The base of the creep feeder can be 75 cm in diameter and 70 cm high, with an 
30 General management
access hole (reinforced to form a carrying handle as well) about 20 cm wide at the top. The gaps 
between the upright slats can be 2 to 3 cm at the bottom and about 1 cm at the top. The 
flexibility of the bamboo strips allows the size of the entryways to be enlarged, as the chicks 
grow bigger. If the chicks are reluctant to leave their mothers’ side, then a more tightly formed 
weave can prevent their exit once they are placed inside the cone through an opening at the top. 
The bamboo can be preserved from insect attack with a coat of used engine oil. 
 Better nutrition for young stock boosts their immune response to disease challenge and to 
vaccine response by developing full immunity. Gunaratne et al  (1994) reported that chick 
mortality rates could be reduced by the use of creep feeders but that this did not increase the 
growth rate. However, when the household wast e was supplemented with protein and fed in the 
creep feeder, both the growth and the survival rate of chicks increased (Roberts et al., 1994). 
 Table 4.4 shows that annual egg production can be doubled because of the increased laying 
time available to the hens if their chicks are fed in a cr eep feeder after hatching (Pratseyo et al.,
1985). If the gaps in the creep feeder are adju sted, it can also be used for growers over eight 
weeks, and if given less than the full ration, they will learn to compete for food with other 
chickens. 
Table 4.4  The effect of creep feeding on flock egg production
Intervention Period 
June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. 
Creep only 31.5 28.7 27.3 21.8 21.4 33.0 
Creep +  
Low supplement 
21.2 18.8 22.9 26.9 30.7 31.1 
Creep +  
High supplement 
24.3 24.5 32.5 34.1 27.4 31.1 
Source: Gunaratne et al., 1993 
Providing water 
Providing clean water is a priority often neglected. The amount of water, the right type of 
equipment and where it is situated ar e important considerations. Table 4.5 shows water 
consumption rates for hot dry conditions, and these can be halved for temperate regions. 
Table 4.5 Minimum water and watering space requirements for 100 birds in hot dry conditions 
Age (weeks) Daily consumption (litres) Water space (m) 
0 – 1 3 0.7 
2 – 4 10 1.0 
4 – 9 20 1.5 
9 or more 25 2.0 
Layer 50 2.5 
In countries with plenty of water, such as Bangladesh, Viet Nam, Indonesia, the Gambia, Sierra 
Leone, Zaire and Uganda, the only special measure to be taken is to ensure its cleanliness. In 
other regions, especially in the Sahel and other drought-prone regions, fetching and carrying 
water is a crucial task, usually assigned to women and children. In the rainy season, clean water 
and feed must be placed in the house, as brooding hens are kept inside to prevent poor 
hatchability resulting from contamination with mud and dirt. 
 The simplest equipment is a tin can inverted into a soup plate or the bottom of a larger tin 
can. A hole is punched about 2 cm from the open end of the tin can. The can is filled with water, 
Small-scale poultry production 31
covered with the plate and both quickly inverted. The position of the punched hole and the 
vacuum in the tin can will regulate the water level in the plate. Tin can waterers work well but 
quickly become rusty, especially in the humid tropics. A clay pot or gourd with holes around the 
sides sunk into the ground for stability can be used to water adult birds. Clay pots of any 
dimension can often be ordered from local pot makers. Because they are permeable they provide 
water half a degree Celsius cooler than  other waterers, as heat  loss through evaporation keeps 
the water cooler. This also means an appreciable  loss of water over time, especially in very hot 
dry areas, so that the pots may have to be ma de more impermeable by glazing. If continuous 
drinking troughs are used, at least 5 cm of trough should be allowed for each bird. Alternatively, 
one cup or nipple drinker may be provided for every ten birds. 
BABY CHICK MANAGEMENT 
Baby chicks should be kept warm and dry. The ne st, which they share at night with the mother 
hen, must be kept clean. In colder climates (below 20 °C at night), the nest site should be kept 
warm by lining it with straw and placing it near a stove or fireplace. The chicks should remain 
with the mother hen for nine to ten weeks, lear ning from her example how to scavenge and 
evade predators and other dangers. Clean drinking water and fresh feed in a clean container 
should be provided to supplement scavenging.  See Chapter 3 “Feed Resources” for more detail 
on feeding techniques. 
 There is a close relationship between chick weight and growth and mortality rates. In an 
experiment where young chickens had access to supplementary feed in a creep feeder (Roberts 
et al ., 1994), it was found that supplementary prot ein feed had a significant effect on the 
survival rate and gr owth rate. Chicks separated from the mother he ns during the day from the 
age of three to ten weeks, and fed with chicken starter mash ad libitum, had a mortality rate of 
20 percent and a body weight of 319 g at ten weeks, compared with a mortality rate of 
30 percent and a body weight of 242 g for the control group which remained with the mother 
hens. See more supplementary detail in the section above, entitled “Creep Feeding”. A suitable 
strategy for rearing chicks therefore would be as follows: 
x The chicks should be confined for the first weeks of life and provided with a balanced 
feed. 
x A vaccination programme should be followed. 
x Sufficient supplementary feed should be pr ovided during the remaining rearing period to 
allow the chickens to develop in accordance with their genetic potential. 
x Feed supplements and protection should be pr ovided to naturally broo ded chickens during 
the first four to eight weeks of life. 
The composition of the supplementary feed will depend on the available scavengable feed, but a 
form of cafeteria free-choice feeding of a pr otein concentrate, energy concentrate and calcium 
mineral in each of three containers may be the best solution. 
 The mortality rate of naturally brooded chicks, whose only source of feed is from scavenging 
under free-range conditions, is very high and often exceeds 50 percent up to eight weeks of age. 
Wickramenratne et al (1994) found that predators accounted for up to 88 percent of mortality 
and that coloured birds had a higher survival rate than white birds. The high mortality rate and 
the large number of eggs required for hatchin g are the main causes of low offtake from 
scavenging poultry flocks. Smith (1990) reported an offtake (sales and consumption) of only 0.3 
chickens per hen/year from a survey done on flo cks in Nigeria. This low offtake has also been 
observed in Bangladesh and India. 
 An efficient way of decreasing mortality rate (a costly loss) is to confine and vaccinate the 
chicks during the rearing period. This however is more expensive, the cost of feed in particular 
increasing production costs. A method used  over the past ten years in many poultry 
development projects in Bangladesh confines the chicks during the first eight weeks of life. 
They are fed approximately 2 kg each of balanced feed and thereafter kept under semi-
scavenging conditions. At eight weeks of age, they are less susceptible to attacks by predators 
32 General management
and more resistant to diseases, due to their larger bo dy weight and more effective vaccination 
immunization (due to their better nutrient intake). 
HYGIENE 
Manure management 
Whatever the type of confin ement, proper attention must be paid to manure management. Adult 
birds produce 500 g of fresh manure (70 percent moisture content) per year per kg of body 
weight. To preserve its fertilizer value, manure should be dried to about 10 to 12 percent 
moisture content before storage. This will retain the maximum nitrogen content for fertilizer 
value. Nitrogen in the form of urea is the most volatile component of manure, and is lost as 
ammonia if moisture content is too high in the stored material. If the moisture content is too 
high, then the stored manure releases ammonia, carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide and 
methane, which can have serious physiological ef fects on humans. Some of these components 
are also greenhouse gases, which contribute to the global increase in ambient temperature. 
Poultry manure is very useful as an organic fertilizer, as animal and fish feed and as a raw 
material for methane gas generation in biogas plants for cooking fuel. 
Other hygiene management measures 
Good ventilation discourages the spread of diseases and pests. In overnight houses, the 
provision of perches or loosely plaited bamboo mats (such as those used for sieving) placed on 
the floor can help to keep them dry. 
 If the birds are housed inside, the floor should be swept daily. An outside chicken house 
should be cleaned every week to break the breeding cycle of the common housefly. It takes 
about seven days to complete the breeding cycle from fly egg to hatching of the adult housefly. 
Wood ash and sand spread on the floor will discourage lice infestation. Mothballs (naphthalene) 
crushed with ash can also be ap plied to the feathers or the wings of the birds, or placed where 
the chickens usually take their dust baths. If the chickens are already infested with mites, the 
house can be fumigated (while the chickens are outside) with a rag drenched in kerosene. Lice 
live on the birds, and dust baths with naphthalene powder in the ash will be more effective than 
dust alone. 
 The practice of keeping chickens and ducks together should be discouraged. This results in 
wet floors, giving rise to diseases such as Fowl Cholera. Ducks are also much more tolerant than 
chickens to Newcastle Disease, and are thus often carriers of this viral disease. Adults and 
young stock of any poultry should be housed  separately to minimize cross-infections and 
injuries from bullying. 
MANAGEMENT OF FREE-RANGE POULTRY 
The unrestricted free-ranging of poultry is ofte n a problem. They trespass onto neighbouring 
fields and gardens, and are constantly at risk fr om predators. Confinement is often not practical 
because of the cost of feed and fencing, while surveillance is only feasible where the very old or 
very young of the household have  time to help. Fencing of vege table plots is in many cases the 
best option. Placing more cocks in the village  might reduce the movements of the chickens, as 
the cocks and hens of each flock would keep mor e to their own territory. Cocks move within an 
eight-to-ten-house territory, and hens within two or three houses. 
 Under the free-range system, the difference between the amounts of food gathered through 
scavenging and the total food requirement fo r maximum production should be balanced with 
nutrients supplied from supplementary feed. To ma ke up a properly balanced supplement, it is 
necessary to know the scavenger feed resource base (SFRB) and the composition of the crop 
contents (see Chapter 3, SFRB). If this is not known, it is recommended th at the fowls have 
access (using a free-choice cafeteria system) to three containers (or three compartments of a 
bamboo stem feeder of ingredients comprising a protein concentrate, a carbohydrate source (for 
energy) and a mineral source (mainly for calcium carbonate for egg shell formation for the hen). 
Small-scale poultry production 33
Poultry should have free access to this caf eteria system for two to three hours in the evening to 
supplement the day’s scavenging. 
 From a feed resource point of view, this recommendation is only economically viable 
(sustainable) if the consumption of supplementary feed per egg produced is equal to 150 to 
180 g or less. Consumption of over 150 g is only justified if the supplements are cheaper than 
the commercial feed us ed in intensive poultry produc tion. Supplements are usually 
recommended in the range of 50 to 80  g/bird/day, so it is usually quite viable. Seasonal 
variations in the SFRB have a substantial effect on production. During the dry season, 
scavenged feed from gardens, crops and wasteland (such as grass shoots, seeds, worms, insects 
and snails) stops, while the quantity and quality of household kitchen waste decrease. The feed 
supplement should be adjusted seasonally to maintain an optim um level of production or, 
alternatively, the chicken population could be adjusted to the amount of the SFRB and the feed 
supplement. 
 Hens in confinement fed a balanced diet will convert food weight to egg weight at an 
efficiency of about 2.8 kg of feed per kilogram of egg weight.  Changes in husbandry alone may 
increase the productivity of scavenging village chickens, without the need for additional inputs. 
In planted orchards, a stocking rate of 120 to 180 birds/ha will clean up windfalls while also 
fertilizing the trees. In this example, the amount of fertilizer produced per hectare for 150 hens 
(weighing two kilograms each) is based on the assumption of 500 g of fresh (70 percent 
moisture) weight of manure produced per kilogram of live weight per year. This results in 330 g 
of dried manure (dried to a ten percent moisture  content) per hen/year, and thus the 150 hens 
will produce 49.5 kg of dry manure per year. This has an equivalent fertiliser value of 13 
percent ammonium nitrate, 8.6 percent super-ph osphate and 2.9 percent potash (potassium) 
salts. Thus the 150 hens will produce the equivalent per hectare/year of 6.4 kg of ammonium 
nitrate, 4.3 kg of super-phosphate and 1.4 kg of potash salts. 
Planning flock production and size 
Production involves birds for meat and eggs. For both meat and egg production, the number of 
chickens in the flock is the most important factor. Flock size changes constantly as eggs hatch 
and hens are sold or eaten. Usually the main cause of flock depletion is mortality, particularly in 
chicks. Disease is the greatest cause of mortality, especially in the rainy season and in the 
weather changeable humid periods on either side. During summer and the rainy season, 
predators in the cropped fields also contribute to reduced flock sizes. Local birds lay an average 
of three to four clutches of 12 to 15 eggs in a year, with more eggs laid at crop harvest time 
because more feed is available. Given most traditional farming systems, keeping the flock 
number constant requires eight to ten eggs for reproduction, leaving an average of 35 to 40 eggs 
per layer for sale or consumption. Because the number of eggs needed for replacement may 
decrease with better management, the extra eggs can be sold or eaten. 
 Most egg laying takes place between sunrise to mid-morning. During the months of laying, 
nest location should not be moved, as this may upset the laying routine. 
 In village flocks, income derives from the sale of eggs and live birds. For example, a flock of 
15 local hens laying 30 eggs/hen/year (with one local cock) will produce 450 eggs in a year. Of 
these 450 eggs, 120 may be incubated by broody he ns (in ten clutches of 12 eggs each), of 
which 100 chicks may hatch, and 30 eggs may be cracked and consumed in the household, 
leaving a balance of 300 eggs for sale. Of the 100 day-old chicks, 30 may reach maturity (with 
rearing losses of 70 percent), to yield 15 cockerels and 15 pullets. The 15 pullets will replace the 
older hens, of which ten remain after the sale of cull hens, and one new cockerel will replace the 
old cock. The annual income from the flock can therefore be calculated as follows: 
300 eggs + 10 old hens + 1 old cock + 14 cockerels = income 
For improved productivity, culling is important and productive birds should be carefully 
selected. For simplicity, the above example assumes no adult mortality. 
34 General management
CASE STUDIES OF FAMILY POULTRY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
A free-range system in Ghana 
In the traditional free-range system of the Mamprusi tribe in northern Ghana (van Veluw, 1987), 
the farmer releases his 19 chickens and six guine a fowls from the space under the grain store 
each morning. Grains are thrown on the ground to feed the birds. A young boy takes care of the 
birds during the day and protects the crops from poultry damage. Occasionally the boy will feed 
the birds with a piece of termite hill, and in the evening he returns with the flock and locks them 
under the granary store. 
 Chicken hens lay throu ghout the year, but guinea fowls lay only in the rainy season. Chicken 
hens produce about 20 to 40 eggs a year and guin ea fowls about 50. Most of the eggs are used 
for hatching. Chickens also hatch guinea fowl eggs, as guinea fowls are not good mothers. 
Hatching takes place throughout the year, although most of the hens incubate their eggs in the 
rainy season. A reproduction cycle (laying, hatchin g, caring for chicks and resting) takes about 
20 weeks. Mortality is high (75 percent) among the young chicks. Out of ten chicks, only about 
two reach adulthood, due mainly to disease, predators and road accidents. Newcastle Disease in 
particular kills many poultry in the dry season. Worms as internal parasites are a great problem, 
weakening the birds. Predators include snakes, birds of prey, cats and dogs. Mortality up to two 
months of age is 50 percent, with a further 25 percent thereafter up to sexual maturity. 
 Hatchability of guinea fowl eggs is very low (45 percent) compared with chickens (72 
percent). Farmers keep hens for  about three years and guinea fowls for two years, after which 
productivity decreases considerably and they are culled. 
Table 4.6  Total annual production of a Mamprusi average flock 
Chickens Guinea fowls Total 
Production 
Flock Production Flock Production 
Cocks 3 1 2 1 2 
Hens 9 3 4 2 5 
Cockerels 2 22 - 13 35 
Pullets 5 19 - 11 30 
Eggs (/hen) - 45 (20) - 65 (50) 110 (380) 
Scavenging commercial hybrid layers in Sri Lanka 
In a study carried out by Roberts and Senaratne (1992), Sri Lankan villagers reared hybrid egg 
layers in a semi-scavenging system. Day-old hybrid chicks were brooded under the heat of a 
small kerosene lamp. The chicks were provided with a little mixed supplement of local crop by-
products, comprising 40 percent rice polish, 50 percent expeller coconut meal and 10 percent 
broken rice. The Proximate chemical analysis of this supplement was 16 percent Crude Protein, 
8 percent Crude Fat, 7 percent Crude Fibre and 7 percent Ash. 
 The amount of the supplement increased from 8 to 60 g/bird/day until 12 weeks of age, and 
was maintained at 60 g thereafter. The growth rate was 38 g/bird/day up to 20 weeks of age. 
The mortality rate of the chicks was only four percent in the period up to ten weeks, which 
compared favourably with mortality of 68 percent up to six weeks in Indonesia (Kingston and 
Creswell, 1982) and 25 percent up to eight weeks in Thailand (Thitisak et al, 1989) in chicks 
hatched and reared by village hens. The comparative advantage of the Sri Lankan performance 
was attributed to supplementing the competitive scavenging, and to the protection against 
predators provided by the semi-intensive manageme nt system. It is probable that chicks would 
also benefit from the use of a simple creep feeder for feeding kitchen waste. The mortality rate, 
in the Sri Lankan example, increased after reachin g eight months of age, perhaps due to a 
greater need for scavenger free-ranging, and almost reached a cumulated 60 percent loss by 13 
Small-scale poultry production 35
months of age. Of the 142 hens lost up to 13  months of age, records were kept for 92. The 
causes of mortality were:  
x 32 percent predators (such as dogs, mongooses, pole cats and snakes); 
x 26 percent disappeared; 
x 15 percent Newcastle disease; 
x 15 percent intestinal infection; 
x 5 percent stolen; 
x 4 percent accidents (vehicles and falling coconuts);  and 
x 2 percent attacked by humans. 
Hens laid their first eggs when they reached 21 week s (146 days) of age, although 40 percent 
production (on a hen/day basis) was not achieved until they were 30 weeks of age. Peak egg 
production was just over 60 percent. A severe drop in production (begin ning when the hens 
were eight months of age) corresponded with an outbreak of Newcastle Disease in local village 
birds and the start of the long dry intermonsoon period . Production fell to  below 30 percent 
when the hens were ten months of age, and slowly rose again to over 60 percent at 13 months of 
age. The recovery in production began during the dry period and was maintained into the next 
season. Egg production wa s comparable with that of hybrid egg layers, which were introduced 
into the village as pullets, provided with a supplement and allowed to scavenge. 
 The production was much better than the 12 to 21 percent reported in village birds in 
Indonesia (Kingston and Creswell, 1982) and in Thailand (Janviriyasopaki et al , 1989) and 
(Creswell and Gunawane, 1982). The egg weight reported by Roberts and Senaratne (1992) was 
60 g compared with about 40 g for village hens (Kingston and Creswell, 1982). 
A free-range system in Senegal 
In a study carried out on farms in Senegal (Sall, 19 90), flock sizes ranged from under five birds 
to more than 15 birds, with an average flock size of ten birds. Seven percent of the flocks 
comprised under five birds, 38 percent comprised five to ten birds, 41 percent comprised 10 to 
15 birds, and 14 percent comprised more than 15 birds. 
 Flocks with fewer than five birds had either recently lost hens or had hens that had not yet 
hatched their eggs. Flock size varied considerably during the year, due to additions (hatchings, 
purchases and gifts) and to chickens either sold or lost through disease or predators. The birds 
were permitted to scavenge during the day and were locked into wooden cages ( ngounou) at 
night for protection. The cages were made on the farm from available materials (including 
bricks, galvanised iron sheets and wo od). The doors were small, to prevent entry by thieves and 
predators. Stock density in the cages was about 25 birds/m
2. Feed and water was available to 
supplement kitchen waste and scavenging. 
 The proportion of young chicks and growers in  the flock was about 60 percent while adults 
represented 40 percent. Mortality in the first month of age was 40 percent. There were four to 
five clutches of eggs laid per year, with 8 to 15 eggs per clutch. Egg weights ranged between 38 
and 43 g with an average of 40 g. Almost all eggs were set for hatching and of these hatchability 
was about 80 percent. The production cycle was eight to ten weeks (10 to 15 days for egg 
laying, 21 days for incubation, and only 34 days for rearing). The chicks remained close to the 
hens for up to two weeks, during which time there was a relatively low mortality rate of 14 
percent. On leaving the immediate protection of the hens, mortality increased sharply to 40 
percent between three and four weeks, and up to 66 percent by three months of age. Similarly, 
the average daily live-weight gain of birds under this extensive system decreased from 10 g at 
eight weeks to 6 g at 12 weeks. 
Table 4.7  Village flock structure in Senegal Source (Sall, 1990)
36 General management
Age
(months) 
Nº Males Nº Females Nº Total  
%
0 – 1 - - - - 320  50.5 
1 – 3 - - -  - 99  15.6 
3 – 6 34 5.4 84 13.3 118  18.6 
6 – 8 2 0.3 21 3.3 23  3.6 
8 -10 1 0.2 19 2.9 20  3.2 
10 + 15 2.4 39 6.2 54  8.5 
Total 52 8.3 163 25.6 634  100 
Table 4.8 Age-related mortality in local birds in Senegal 
Age 
(weeks)
% Mortality 
(cumulative)
1 13 ± 5 
2 15 ± 9 
3 39 ± 20 
4 42 ± 20 
8 49 ± 20 
12 66 ± 17 
Source: Sall, 1990, p 37 
Table 4.9 Body weight of local birds in Senegal
Age Nº Males Nº Females Nº Males + Females 
1 week - - - - 81 34±5 
2 weeks - - - - 75 58±10 
3 weeks - - - - 66 101±43 
1 month - - - - 98 171±70 
2 months - - - - 41 464±242 
3 months - - - - 58 631±211 
4 months 29 
975±20 63 746±170 92 860 
6 months 5 1380±150 21 1229±165 26 1305 
8 months 2 1826±75 21 1264±183 23 1544 
10 months 1 1500 19 1245±150 20 1372 
+ 1 year 15 1803±4 39 1350±223 54 1577 
Source: Sall, 1990
Small-scale poultry production 37
Chapter 5 
Incubation and Hatching 
NATURAL INCUBATION 
The broody hen chosen for natural incubation should be large (to cover and thus keep more eggs 
warm), healthy and preferably vaccinated, with a go od brooding and mothering record. Signs of 
broodiness are that the hen stops laying, remains sitting on her eggs, ruffles her feathers, spreads 
her wings and makes a distinctive clucking soun d. Brooding may be induced with dummy eggs 
or even stones. 
 Eggs usually become fertile about four days after the rooster has been introduced to the hens. 
A maximum of 14 to 16 eggs may be brooded in one nest, but hatchability often declines with 
more than ten eggs, depending on the size of the hen. Feed and water provided in close 
proximity to the hen will keep her in better condition and reduce embryo damage due to the 
cooling of the eggs if she has to leave the nest to scavenge for food. 
 The hen keeps the eggs at the correct humidity by splashing water on them from her beak. 
This is a further reason for providing her with easy access to water. In very dry regions, slightly 
damp soil can be placed under the nesting material to assist the hen in maintaining the correct 
humidity (between 60 and 80 percent). Fertile eggs from other birds are best added under the 
brooding hen between one and four days after the  start of brooding. In Bangladesh, it has been 
reported that local broody hens will even sit on and hatch a second clutch of eggs, often losing 
considerable weight in the process (especially if insufficient attention is paid to the provision of 
food and water). 
 The incubation period for chicken eggs is 20  to 21 days, and increases up to 30 days for 
other poultry. After sitting for some days, a broody hen can be given some newly hatched 
chicks and, if they are accepted, the original eggs can be removed and replaced with more 
chicks. Thus hens with a better record of mothering can be better utilised for their abilities. 
 Eggs initially need a very controlled heat input to maintain the optimum temperature of 38 
°C, because the embryo is microscopic in size. As the embryo grows in size (especially after 18 
days), it produces more heat than it requires and may even need cooling. Moisture levels of 60 
to 80 percent Relative Humidity (inc reasing during the incubatio n period) are important to stop 
excess moisture loss from the egg contents th rough the porous egg shell and membranes. 
Factors to consider for successful natural incubation include the following: 
x Feed and water should be close to the hen. 
x The broody hen should be examined to ensure that she has no external parasites. 
x Any eggs stored for incubatio n should be kept at a temperature between 12 and 14 qC, at 
a high humidity of between 75 to 85 percent, and stored for no longer than seven days. 
x Extra fertile eggs introduced under the hen from elsewhere should be introduced at dusk. 
x The eggs should be tested for fertility after one week by holding them up to a bright light 
(a candling box works best. If there is a dark shape inside the egg (the developing 
embryo), then it is fertile. A completely clear (translucent) egg is infertile. 
A hatchability of 80 percent (of eggs set) from natural incubation is normal, but a range of 75 to 
80 percent is considered satisfactory. Setting of hatchings is best timed so that the chicks to be 
hatched are two months of age at the onset of major weather changes, such as either the rainy 
(or dry) season or winter/summer. A plentiful natural food supply over the growing period of 
the chicks will ensure a better chance for their survival. Successful poultry species instinctively 
lay and incubate their eggs at a time of the year when newly hatched chicks will have a better 
supply of high protein and energy food provided by the environment. For example, guinea fowl 
will only lay eggs in the rainy season. However, seasonal changes in weather patterns are also 
times of greater disease risk. 
38 Incubation and Hatching 
ARTIFICIAL INCUBATION (PARCHED  PADDY RICE AND RICE HUSK 
TECHNIQUES) 
There are many commercial artificial incubators of varying capacities. Most depend on 
electricity, but some use gas or kerosene fo r heating. All use a thermostatic switching device to 
keep the temperature consta nt within one Celsius degree. The correct humidity is usually 
maintained by having a pre-determined surface area of water appropriate for each incubator 
chamber. 
 Turning the egg several times each day is important to prevent the embryo from sticking to 
the shell membranes. With hand-turning systems, an  odd number of times turned per day (five 
to seven times) will ensure that during successive overnight periods the egg is always oriented 
the opposite way from that of the previous night. 
 The broody hen carries out all of these incubation tasks instinctively, and artificial 
incubation attempts to duplicate these tasks. Traditional artificial incubation techniques have 
evolved over thousands of years in many parts of  the world. One such technique, developed for 
hatching duck eggs in China, is the parched (heated) rice technique. It is based on the use of 
heated paddy rice and embryo-generated heat. It is still used in China and Bali, Indonesia, with 
hatchability results of up to 80 percent (Smith, 1990). The objectives of artificial incubation are 
met equally well using either parched rice or rice husks, and a hatchability of 65 to 75 percent is 
common. By candling the eggs between days 5 and 7, infertile eggs can be detected as “clears” 
(as the light is not obscured by the growing embryo). These eggs are still suitable for sale for 
human consumption, which improves the economic viability of this system. 
 As duck eggshells are less brittle than chicken eggs, the system was never adopted for 
chicken eggs in China. The original Chinese system used 80 duck eggs per bundle. However, 
with extra care, and fewer eggs per bundle (25 to 30 compared with 40 duck eggs), chicken egg 
incubation was found to be equally successful in Bangladesh when adapted there in the 1980s. 
The number of duck eggs per bundle was reduced to 40, which gave better hatching results as 
well as fewer breakages than 80 per bundle. 
 The artificial parched rice or rice husk incubation process is started by heating the eggs, 
either in the sun or in an insulated warming room equi pped with a heat source. On sunny days, 
approximately 25 to 30 chicken eggs or 40 duck eggs, (presumed fertile, and carefully dated and 
labelled) are placed in the sun on pieces of padded cloth for about 30 minutes and turned 
occasionally to raise the temperature of the eggs to the required 37 to 38 qC. This temperature 
can be judged by the appearance of water droplets on the shell or by touching the egg to the 
eyelid. On sunless days, eggs must be placed  on a cloth in a shallow bamboo basket and put on 
racks in a heated warming room to slowly achieve  the same temperature. This usually requires 
approximately one to three hours. Any slow-burni ng fuel is suitable, and kerosene and charcoal 
are commonly used. In Egypt, dried beanstalks were used for thousands of years for their 
characteristic slow-burning property, and are still used today in the Fayoumi district (from 
where the well-known chicken breed of the same name originates). A well-vented stove will 
prevent any toxic fumes a ffecting the embryo. In Bangladesh, slightly heated (to 38 
oC) sand or 
wood-ash, covering the eggs for approximately one minute, is also effective in warming the 
eggs. Human clinical thermometers, now readily available, can be used to assist training in 
using the eyelid’s sensitivity to temperature. If the humidity drops below 70 percent, 60 percent, 
50 percent or even 40 perc ent (particularly in typical progressively drier months), a wet (and 
slightly warm) cloth should be placed over the eggs with a frequency corresponding to the 
above humidities of one, two, four or six times daily. This will raise the humidity of the egg so 
that the embryo will not dry out. 
 The unhusked (paddy) rice is heated (parched) and continuously stirred until it reaches a 
temperature of 60 qC, to provide heat for the eggs for the first two weeks of incubation. About 
2.5 to 3.0 kg of the heated rice is enclosed in a cloth pillow and placed into the egg basket. The 
pillows have the same diameter (40 cm in the Bangladesh example) as the basket, and should be 
about 8 cm thick. Where rice-husk is used, pillows can be made with black-coloured material, 
which easily absorb the sun’s heat. When the temperature of the pillow has dropped to about 
Small-scale poultry production 39
40 qC, a loosely bunched bundle of 40 duck (or 25 to 30 chicken) pre-warmed eggs are placed 
on top of the warm rice. The bundle is made from a square piece of cloth about 45 cm on each 
side. A soft duster cloth with pinholes is suitable. Alternating pillows of warm rice and egg 
bundles are added until the basket is full, finishing with a pillow of rice. The basket is then 
covered with padding to conserve as much heat as possible. This procedure is repeated until all 
the eggs are placed in baskets, leaving one basket empty to allow the addition of freshly warmed 
rice. The incubating baskets are cylindrical in shape (50 cm in diameter and 80 cm in depth in 
China, and 40 cm in diameter and 70 cm in depth in Bangladesh and are made of woven 
bamboo strips. In China, a few layers of bamboo paper are pasted on the inner surface of the 
sides and bottom to seal the gaps against temperature loss through convection. 
 In warmer parts of southern China, rice husk is substituted for paddy rice, and the pillows 
containing the husks are made from black-coloure d material, which easily heat up in the sun. 
Rice husks also provide very good insulation against loss of heat from the older eggs, which is 
instead transferred (by conduction) to younger eggs placed in contact with them in separate 
bundles. This rice-husk system was adopted on a large scale in Bangladesh after being 
introduced by poultry development projects in the 1980s. The system has evolved, and the 
cylindrical egg baskets are now set into larger bamboo frame setting boxes, with more 
insulating rice husk material placed between the cylinders and the walls of the enclosing setting 
boxes. The cylinder wall should be about 10 cm from the setting box wall and 8 cm from the 
next cylinder. With this greater insulation, there is less heat loss, thus less need to provide 
supplementary heat from costly fuels. 
 For the first three days, reheated paddy ri ce (or rice husk) is added three times a day at 
regular intervals. During days four to six, this may be reduced to twice a day. The object is to 
ensure that the eggs are kept at the temp erature most suitable for embryo development. The 
spare basket is used to transfer eggs from an ad joining basket when adding freshly warmed rice 
or rice-husks. Thus the top layer of eggs beco mes the bottom layer and the bottom layer ends up 
on top of the spare cylinder. The newly emptied basket is then ready to receive eggs from the 
third basket, and so the cycle continues. 
 In China, heat is provided for days 13 to 14 in summer and in the colder months also on days 
18 to 19. After that, the developing embryos are able to produce enough heat to maintain the 
incubation process without further need of an outside heat sour ce. Eggs set for the first six days 
are called "new eggs", those between days 6 to 13 (which neither need no r produce extra heat) 
are "in-between eggs" and eggs after day 13 (which give out excess heat) are "old eggs". Once a 
basket contains "old" and "in-between eggs", it is possible to use embryo-generated heat alone 
to incubate "new eggs", which are usually introduced at intervals into the basket and placed 
between layers of "old eggs". Even when outside heat is not added, the eggs in the baskets must 
be regularly turned and aired three to five times a day in the process of transferring them to 
adjoining baskets. In order to use the embryo-g enerated heat effectively (almost all year round), 
the layers of eggs in the baskets are organized to a particular pattern, a typical example of which 
is shown in Table 5.1. 
 The eggs are candled on days 5 and 13, both to identify infertile eggs and dead embryos and 
to assess the degree of embryo development; which is used as one of the guides in adjusting 
basket temperature. Placing the egg on the upper eyelid allows the egg temperature to be 
assessed. The temperature of the basket may be adjusted in the following ways: 
x by varying the proportion of eggs in a bask et at different stages of incubation (for 
example, the temperature may be lowered by removing some of the bundles of "old 
eggs"); 
x by varying the arrangement of eggs in a basket (for example, as heat dissipation from 
eggs near the sides of the basket is faster than from those in the centre; a bundle of "old 
eggs" can be placed in the centre core and bundles of "new eggs" shaped to enclose 
them);  and 
40 Incubation and Hatching 
x by changing the top covering of the basket using heavier padded material in cold weather 
and at the beginning of the incubation pe riod, and a lighter covering if less heat retention 
is required. 
Table 5.1 Arrangement of eggs in the incubation baskets prior to and after transfer to adjoining 
baskets 
Incubation time (days) 
Layer Before transfer Summer Winter After transfer 
1 A 14-6 17-20 J 
2 B 1-3 1-4 I 
3 C 10-13 13-16 H 
4 D 4-6 5-8 G 
5 E 7-9 9-12 F 
6 F 7-9 9-12 E 
7 G 4-6 5-8 D 
8 H 10-13 13-16 C 
9 I 1-3 1-4 B 
10 J 14-16 17-20 A 
Source: Fuan, 1987
Eggs in the advanced stages of incubation produce a lot of heat, so on days 13 to 14 in summer 
(days 18 to 19 in winter), the "old eggs" are tra nsferred to hatching beds, where they are placed 
in a single layer for final development and hatc hing. The surface of the bed is covered with a 
thin layer of rice husks and the n covered with a straw mat. The edges of the bed are lined with 
padding to protect the eggs. The covering for the  developing eggs in the bed may be heavy or 
light cloth, depending on the degree of insulation required. The temperature in the hatching bed 
is maintained at 36 to 37 qC, slightly lower than that of the basket. The temperature can be 
adjusted by changing the thickness of the covering, varying the space between the eggs, and 
moving the eggs twice a day so that those on the perimeter change places with those at the 
centre. In very hot dry weather, the eggs are spr ayed with a fine mist of water. They are kept in 
the bed until the chicks hatch out and dry. 
 The hatching bed should be two-storied (like a bed-bunk) and can be made of wood. An 
example hatching bed with a 500-egg capacity has a length of 90 cm and width of 68 cm. The 
height of the side wall on all sides should be 20 cm from the bed base level, with a 25 cm gap 
above the side wall for ventilation and ease of access. 
Small-scale poultry production 41
Chapter 6 
Health
In most family flocks, disease is an important problem. Although farmers are familiar with the 
signs and symptoms of disease (see Table 6.1), the underlying causes are less well known. 
Almost every farmer and most extension worke rs hold Newcastle Disease (ND) responsible for 
most deaths, and the disease has a local name in all languages. 
Table 6.1  Signs of poultry disease observed by farmers in East Kalimantan villages, Indonesia
Signs Frequency 
%
Chickens huddle together 16.1 
Coughing, sneezing, rapid breathing 13.2 
Discharge from mouth and nostrils 10.9 
Dullness, no appetite, closed eyes 10.9 
Paralysis of legs and wings 9.2 
White droppings 8.6 
Turned or twisted neck 8.0 
Dark red colour of head and comb 6.9 
Greenish or yellow droppings 4.6 
Bloody reddish droppings 4.0 
Swellings of head and comb  2.9 
Pale comb 1.7 
Worms in faeces 1.7 
Eye worm 1.1 
Source: Ramm et al., 1984 
However, not all infectious diseases are du e to the Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV). Digestive 
problems resulting in slow growth and diarrhoea may be the result of rancid feed or too much 
salt, and may also be symptoms of diseases such as coccidiosis, salmonellosis, or Gumboro 
Disease (Also called Infectious Bursal Disease [IBD]). ND often has the symptom of greenish 
faeces, which indicates a loss of appetite. 
 Poultry have highly developed and sophisticate d respiratory systems. Their heart and 
breathing rate are faster than humans, and thei r body temperature is 5 °C higher. Their lungs are 
connected at the lower ends to a complex series of membrane-enclosed air sacs, which in turn 
are connected to air cavities in their major skeletal bones. These features contribute to their 
lightness and flying ability. The disadvantage is extreme susceptibility to respiratory infections 
caused by a wide range of bacteria, viruses and fungi. These infections become more of a 
problem in domestication, which usually involves some degree of increase in sto ck density – 
even if only for overnight accommodation – and thus increases the risk of cross-infection. 
 Inadequate ventilation of poultry houses results in a build-up of ammonia gas from poultry 
faeces, which contain urea. This can predispose the poultry to  respiratory disorders, such as 
sneezing, running eyes and mucous discharges from the mouth. Providing good ventilation 
easily prevents this. More prolonged respiratory disorders are usually caused by diseases such 
as ND, Infectious Bronchitis (IB), Infectious Laryngotracheitis (ILT), Chronic Respiratory 
Disease (CRD) and diphtheria. 
42 Health 
 Coordination disorders such as paralysis, limp ing, twisted neck and slow movement may be 
caused by a variety of factors, such as phys ical injury, nutrient de ficiencies and diseases, 
including ND (twisted necks or torticolis), Marek's Disease (paralysis), synovitis (tendon 
infections in which feet joints feel warm) and Avian Encephalomyelitis (AE). 
COMMON DISEASES 
The common diseases and disorders of free-range poultry may be either infectious or non-
infectious, and are caused by a wide range of organisms or deficiencies. These are summarised 
in Table 6.2. Disease control is discussed in a later section of this chapter. 
Table 6.2  Causes and examples of poultry diseases 
Causal Agent Example
Infectious
Virus Newcastle Disease, Avian Encephalomyelitis, 
 Fowl Pox, Marek's Disease, Infectious Bronchitis 
 Infectious Laryngotracheitis, Gumboro Disease (Infectious Bursal 
Disease), Duck Virus Hepatitis 
Mycoplasma Chronic Respiratory Disease 
Bacteria Fowl Choler a, Salmonellosis, Pullorum, Fowl Typhoid, Infectious 
Sinusitis, Colibacilosis 
Parasites Ectoparasites: lice, mites, ticks 
Endoparasites: nematodes, Histomoniasis, Haemoparasites, round 
worms, hair worms, Avian Malaria 
Protozoa: Coccidiosis, Blackhead 
Fungus Aspergillosis: A. flavis (toxins), A. fumigatus (airsaculitis) 
Non-Infectious
Deficiencies rickets, curled toe paralysis, encephalomalacia 
Toxicities salt poisoning, food poisoning (Botulism Clostridium botulinum 
and C. perfringens), poisonous plants 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES 
Viral diseases 
Viral diseases are some of the most important infectio us diseases affecting poultry. They are 
characterised by not being able to be treated,  but most can be prevented with vaccines. The 
more important viral diseases are outlined below. 
Newcastle Disease (ND) 
This disease (called Ranikhet Disease in Asia) sp reads rapidly via airborne droplets spread by 
the coughing or sneezing of inf ected birds. The virus can be carried by wild birds, through 
contaminated eggs, and on clothing. As mortality is often 100 percent in young chickens, ND is 
probably the most important constraint to family poultry development. Birds of any age can be 
affected, although young ones are more susceptible. Mortality in older chickens is usually 
lower, but egg production is usually severely reduced. 
 The incubation period of three to five days is followed by dullne ss, coughing, sneezing and 
gasping. Rapid breathing is accompanied by a gurgling noise in the throat. The respiratory signs 
usually develop first and are sometimes followed by nervous sign s, characterized by twisting of 
the neck, sometimes combined with dragging of wings and legs. Depending on the environment 
and the degree of resistance of the birds, not all symptoms may be shown, or they may be in a 
Small-scale poultry production 43
mild or subclinical form. Some farmers have observed that the twisting of the neck occurs only 
in birds that survive. Early loss of appetite results in a greenish diarrhoea. The most obvious 
diagnostic sign of ND is very sudden, very high mortality, often with few symptoms having had 
time to develop. Diagnosis of ND can be difficult from just the symptoms, as they are so varied, 
and as many other diseases share the same symptoms. For a discussion on the control of ND, 
see the “ND Control” section below. The high inci dence of ND among family free-range flocks 
is due to the following factors: 
x the prevalence of virulent strains (velogenic,  viscerotropic and pneumotropic) in tropical 
countries;
x continuous contact with other domestic and wild species of birds (such as ducks and 
pigeons), which can carry the virus without showing the disease (Majiyagbe and 
Nawathe, 1981);  and 
x uncontrolled movement of birds between villages. 
There is a seasonal pattern to outbreaks of ND (Sharma et al., 1986), influenced by: 
x the arrival of migratory birds; 
x changes in climatic conditions leading to stress, which predisposes birds to the disease; 
x hot, dry and windy periods, which encourage airborne spread of the virus;  and 
x overuse of the few supply points of water available (during the dry season), which then 
become heavily contaminated with the virus. 
Fowl pox 
Fowl pox is still prevalent in many poultry flocks, for the following reasons: 
x The fowl pox virus can remain alive in the pox scabs (which have fallen off the birds) for 
up to ten years, which contaminate the environment. 
x Mosquitoes and other blood-sucking insects can transmit the virus. 
The disease tends to be seasonal, occurring after mosquito breeding times. It is endemic in 
Papua New Guinea, where it is significant economically because the only NDV in the country is 
the non-symptomatic form (Sugrim, 1987). It is  also a major disease in many other tropical 
countries. 
Marek's Disease 
Infection occurs early in life, and once a bir d is infected, it can shed the virus in skin flakes 
throughout its life, if it surv ives. Clinical signs occur in young growing birds in the Acute 
Marek’s Disease (MD) form, characterised by high mortality from visceral tumours. Another 
peak of mortality occurs in the Classical MD form, characterized by nerve paralysis in the legs 
and wings of birds aged from 15 weeks to early in the laying period. 
Mycoplasmal diseases 
Mycoplasmas are not classified as bacteria or viruses, but as Pleuro-pneumonia-cocci-like 
organisms (PPLO). These are primarily associated with  Chronic Respiratory Disease (CRD), a 
complex syndrome caused by Mycoplasma gallisepticum in partnership with bacteria (often E. 
coli), fungi and viruses (often Infectious Bronchitis). M. gallisepticum can be transmitted 
through the egg. Multi-age flocks, nutritional deficiency and water deprivation are important 
factors in the epidemiology of the disease in rural poultry flocks. 
44 Health 
Bacterial diseases 
Fowl Cholera (Avian Pasteurellosis) 
This is a contagious septicaemia (caused by Pasteurella multocida ) that affects all types of 
fowls. It is often transmitted by wild birds or other domestic birds, and spreads by 
contamination of the feed or water and by oral or  nasal discharges fr om infected birds. The 
incubation period is four to nine days, but acute outbr eaks can occur within  two days of 
infection. In some cases, birds die within a few hours of showing the first signs, which vary 
depending on the form of the disease. The respiratory form is characterized by gasping, 
coughing and sneezing, while in the septicaemic form there is diarrhoea with wet grey, yellow, 
or green droppings. In the localized form, the signs are lameness and swelling of legs or wing 
joints. In acute cases, the h ead and comb change colour to dark red or purple. If the infection is 
localized in the region of the ears, a twisted neck ( torticolis) can sometimes be observed. In 
chronic cases, the comb is usually pale, with swellings around the eyes and a discharge from the 
beak or nostril. Fowl Cholera is common everywhere among free-range village flocks, because 
they are comprised of different species and are in continuous contact with wild birds. 
Pullorum (Bacillary White Diarrhoea) 
This is an egg-transmitted disease (caused by Salmonella pullorum ) that spreads during 
incubation or just after hatching. White diarrhoea can be seen from three days to several weeks 
of age. The chicks refuse to eat, keep their heads tucked in and their wings hanging down. They 
huddle together and make a peeping sound. Mortality in the acute form ranges from 20 to 80 
percent, and in the chronic form is around five percent. In the chronic form, the signs are a 
marked swelling of the hock joints, poor feather development, lack of appetite and depression. 
Table 6.3 shows the results of a survey in Zaria, Nigeria, conducted by Adesiyun et al. (1984) 
for Pullorum antibodies, which indicate a past infection with the bacteria. 
Table 6.3  Prevalence of Salmonella pullorum antibody in chickens in northern Nigeria 
Management  Age (wks) Nº tested Nº positive (%) 
Free-range young 59 15 25 
(indigenous) adult 101 40 40 
Backyard young 90 8 9 
(exotic) 20 + 70 24 34 
Confinement young 70 22 31 
(exotic) 20 + 90 69 77 
Source: Adesiyun et al., 1984 
The free-range stock sampled was indigenous, and the other two groups were exotic. As the age 
of the birds in the free-range survey was not known, birds not in lay were counted as young. 
Fowl Typhoid 
Fowl typhoid is caused by Salmonella gallinarum, and commonly affects adult fowls. When it 
occurs in young birds, the signs are similar to those of S. pullorum. The incubation period is 
four to five days, and two days later the birds become depressed and anorexic. The colour of the 
comb and wattles becomes dark red; the droppings become yellow and the birds close their eyes 
and keep their heads down. Usually the affected  chickens die within three to six days. Pullorum 
and fowl typhoid complex are both prevalent under free-range conditions. 
Small-scale poultry production 45
Avian Salmonellosis (Paratyphoid) 
Salmonellosis is usually used to describe  infection with an y organism of the  Salmonella group 
other than S. pullorum  or S. gallinarium . In countries with intensive poultry systems, poultry 
meat and eggs are a major source of infection for humans. The opposite may be true of family 
poultry, with humans infecting poultry. Ojeniyi (1984) reported that S. hirschfeldii was isolated 
from cloacal swab samples in fowls and from an adult human male in the same village. 
Parasitic diseases 
External parasites (ectoparasites) 
These are very common in scavenging poultry, and include: 
x Lice: these live on the skin of the birds, especially around the cloacae and under the wings. 
The irritation they cause can lead to reduced produc tion. Lice species commonly found on 
poultry are Menacanthus straminens, Lipeurus caponis, Monopon gallinae, Goniodes 
gigas and Chelopistes meleagride.
x Mites: these are troublesome ectoparasites, which hide in the cracks of housing and 
perches, and come out only at night. They are bloodsuckers and lower egg production. 
Mites such as Dermanyssus gallinae can also transmit the bacteria Borrelia, which causes 
fever, depression, cyanosis and anaemia (spirochaetosis). 
x Ticks: a heavy infestation can produce severe anaemia and, in extreme cases, death due to 
blood loss. Argas persicus is particularly dangerous, being the vector of several blood 
parasites such as the haemoprotozoa and microf ilaria. In Malaysia, it was reported (Sani et
al., 1987) that out of 201 blood samples taken from village birds, more than 100 contained 
Leucocytozoon sabrazesi , 30 had microfilaria, and six carried Plasmodium gallinaceum 
(Avian malaria). Avian malaria infection is much higher among exotics and cross-breeds. 
Internal parasites (endoparasites) 
The more important internal parasites are: 
x Helminths (worms): these are common in scavenging poultry, especially nematodes and 
cestodes. Ssenyonga (1982) showed that worms were a major cause of lowered egg 
production of scavenging poultry in Ug anda, the most commonly found being Ascaridia 
galli (Round Worm) , Heterakis gallinae (Caecal Worm), Syngamus trachae (Tracheal 
Worm) and Raillientina spp. (Tape Worm). 
x Protozoa: the most pathogenic are the coccidiosis disease species of Eimeria tenella and E. 
necatrix. Coccidiosis is a common parasitic infection in scavenging poultry. It affects 
mostly young birds, and the most important signs are emaciation, thirst, listlessness, 
ruffled plumage, bloodstained faeces and bir ds huddling together. Surveys in Southeast 
Asia and East Africa showed that 73 and 47 percent of birds, respectively, had positive 
faecal samples of Eimeria spp. (Eissa, 1987). The presence of the coccidia organism in 
faecal samples indicates an infection, but not necessarily at clinical disease levels. Like 
antibody presence in blood samples, it may indicate a degree of immunity. This should not 
be “treated”, as doing so eliminates the immunity. 
Fungal diseases 
Mycotoxicosis 
The fungus Aspergillus flavus  commonly grows on stored feed ingredients where moisture 
content is over eleven percent, especially cereal grains (such as maize [corn]) and oilcake meal 
(such as groundnut [peanut] meal). The aflatoxin called mycotoxin is the specific toxin 
produced by A. flavus. The toxin itself may remain after all sign of the fungus mould is gone. 
Ducks are more vulnerable to the toxin (with a lethal dose in the feed of one part per million 
[ppm] of aflatoxin) than chicken, which can tolerate up to four ppm. In acute forms of the 
disease, mortality can be as high as 50 percent. Common adverse effects include 
46 Health 
immunosuppression, reduced growth in young stock and reduced egg production in hens 
(Smith, 1990). 
Aspergillosis 
This disease is also called airsaculitis. The fungus  Aspergillus fumigatus  causes the disease by 
growing as a fungus in the lungs and interconnected air sacs. The fungus grows on damp litter 
or feed, and the bird breathes in the spores, whic h grow into easily visible lesions as green and 
yellow nodules, which can completely fill the lungs. 
NON-INFECTIOUS DISEASES 
Deficiencies 
Poultry health is also affected by nutritional and environmental factors, such as insufficient feed 
or feed deficiencies. A high mortality rate among chicks during the first days or weeks after 
hatching may be caused by insufficient feed and water. A high mortality in adult birds may be 
due to nutritional problems, such as salt deficiency. 
 Energy and protein deficiencies and imbalances can arise when the feed contains insufficient 
quantities of these nutrients, resulting in poor growth in young stock and a drop in egg 
production and egg weight in laying hens. Mineral  and vitamin deficiencies may result in poor 
growth, low production or death. Vitamin D deficiency causes rickets (bone deformities) in 
young chicks and, if combined with a calcium de ficiency, in chickens of all ages. A lack of 
manganese results in deformities of the feet of older chickens. 
Toxicities 
An excess of certain nutrients, especially minerals, can cause abnormalities. An excess of 
common salt (NaCl), for example, results in deformed eggshells as well as increased water 
consumption, and if drinking water is restricted (as  is often the case with fr ee-ranging birds), 
signs of toxicity may develop. Free access to feed of high carbohydrate and low fat, combined 
with lack of exercise, high temperatures and stress, can cause Fatty Liver Syndrome, which can 
result in high mortality. 
 Ingestion of toxic plant parts (such as leaves, seeds and sap) is a common hazard for free-
range birds. Some toxins are produced by micro-organisms, such as those liberated by the 
bacteria Clostridium botulinum and C. perfringens, both found in the soil. C. perfringens causes 
necrotic enteritis, caused when the bacteria multiplies in the favourable conditions of the 
digestive tract and liberates a potent toxin that results in high mortality. Occasionally affected 
birds show anorexia, depression and diarrhoea, but most die without showing any clinical signs. 
C. botulinum causes botulism disease, which is acute food poisoning. This is more common in 
ducks, which show the nervous symptoms of neck bent down and feathers falling out easily 
when lightly pulled. Botulism results from the bird eating rotting vegetable scraps, which 
contain the toxins produced by the C. botulinum. Household vegetable scraps which are not 
regularly removed are a potential hazard for botulism. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Management system effects 
Although nearly all the important poultry diseases are fo und under all types of management, the 
pattern of disease in free-range birds is different from that seen in intensive poultry production. 
Free-range flocks usually compri se different species of all ages, and are constantly exposed to 
the weather, environment and seasonal outbreaks  of disease, as well as to germs and parasites 
found in the soil and in wild birds and animals. 
 In a 15-year study of the incidence of poultry diseases in northern Nigeria, Sa'idu et al.
(1994) found viral infections (such as ND in ch ickens and pox in turkeys) to be the most 
common cause of disease, although concurrent viral infection with parasites constituted about 
Small-scale poultry production 47
half the cases studied (see Table 6.3). They concluded that viruses and parasites caused the most 
important diseases in indigenous chickens and that they were seasonal in their onset. 
Table 6.4  Diseases affecting local chickens and turkeys in Zaria, northern Nigeria 
Chickens
Disease Proportionate mortality (%) 
Newcastle Disease 36.1 
COMBINATIONS 28.5 
Snake bite  8.6 
Other Diseases 8.6 
Gumboro 7.1 
Fowl Pox 5.1 
Ectoparasites 3.5 
Endoparasites  2.5 
Turkeys
Disease  Proportion of all diseases (%) 
Turkey pox 16.5 
Ectoparasites  15.7 
Newcastle Disease 12.2 
COMBINATIONS  10.6 
Infectious sinusitis 10.2 
Endoparasites 3.5 
Other Diseases 31.3 
Source: Sa'idu et al., 1994
Another study (Adene and Ayandokun, 1992), which looked at the changing pattern of diseases 
in southern Nigeria over the period from 1949 to 1955, found that mortality in the free-ranging 
flocks at the University of Ibadan was due mostly to the following: 
x Helminthiasis, due to Raillietina, Heterakis, Ascaridia, Capillaria, Tetrameres  and 
Syngamus spp.; 
x Pediculosis, due to Menopon, Gonoeodes, Goniocotes and Lipeuris spp.;  and tropical 
poultry mites ( Ornithonyssus bursa) in chickens, and Numidilipueria tropicalis in guinea 
fowls. 
These parasitic infections were greater causes of mortality than Newcastle Disease at that time. 
Another survey of backyard chicke n flocks in Zimbabwe (Kelly et al., 1994) tested 450 blood 
samples from 52 flocks, and found Infectious Bronchitis (IB) in 85 percent and Newcastle 
Disease (ND) in only 27 percent of the samples (see Table 6.4). A possible explanation for the 
lower frequency of ND is that the mortality is usually much higher from ND than for IB, so 
fewer birds survive to be counted. 
 Similarly, in Zambia, a survey based on  2000 blood samples (Alders et al., 1994) found that 
the mean seroprevalence of Newcastle Disease was 37 percent, which varied between 29 
percent in the northern province and 51 percent in the Copper-belt province. A summary of the 
relative importance of poultry diseases gathered from other sources is tabulated in Table 6.5. 
48 Health 
Table 6.5  Disease status in backyard chicken flocks in Zimbabwe as shown by blood testing 
Pathogens  Percent positive samples 
Infectious Bronchitis 85 
Reticulo-endotheliosis 65 
Gumboro Disease 55 
Pasteurella multocida 52 
Mycoplasma gallisepticum and /or
Mycoplasma synoviae 33 
Newcastle Disease 27 
Encephalomyelitis 11 
Avian Leucosis 9 
Reovirus 3 
Source: Kelly et al., 1994 
Table 6.6  Relative importance of family poultry diseases 
Rank Saunders 
1984
Burkina Faso 
Adene
1990
Nigeria 
Ramm
et al., 
1984
Indonesia
Ahmed 
1987
Bangladesh 
1 ND ND ND ND 
2 Trichomonas Gumboro CRD Fowl Cholera 
3 Fowl Pox Fowl Pox Fowl Pox Coccidiosis 
4 Salmonellosis F. typhoid Coccidiosis Fowl pox 
5 Pasteurellosis Marek's 
Disease 
Fowl Cholera Pullorum 
6 Parasites Parasites Pullorum Parasites 
Poultry species effects 
In tropical countries, Newcastle Disease is considere d to be the most important disease of 
village flocks because of its high mortality, which is above 70 percent in most African 
countries. However, not all poultry species are equally susceptible. Guinea fowl, although 
sometimes affected, appear to have better resistanc e to ND even when kept with chickens. They 
are however more susceptible to Trichomonas, to which chickens appear to be immune. Ducks 
are not thought to be susceptible to ND (although they  are significant carriers of the disease), or 
to most other common diseases of chicken, but the y succumb easily to diseases specific to 
ducks, such as: 
x Duck Virus Enteritis (Duck Plague): this is an acute and highly contagious disease of 
ducks, with a mortality rate of up to 100 percent. 
x Duck Virus Hepatitis and Mycotoxicosis: these pose a great danger for ducklings. 
Mycotoxicosis is mostly contracted from ingesting aflatoxin from mouldy compound 
feeds; a dose of 0.75 ppm can kill a duckling. 
x Duck Cholera ( Pasteurella multocida infection): this is a widespread disease of ducklings 
in village flocks, and chickens can also be infected. 
x  Pasteurellosis ( Pasteurella anapestifer ): this is an important disease of ducklings, while 
Escherichia coli  infection (Colibacillosis) is a septicaemic disease of growing ducks. 
Chickens can also be infected with E. coli.
Small-scale poultry production 49
The above diseases are largely responsible for the huge losses of ducklings that are a feature of 
free-range duck production. 
 Although salmonellosis is not a major disease in ducks, duck eggs are a significant source of 
salmonellosis in humans. This may explain the taboo agai nst touching duck eggs prevalent in 
many cultures, particularly in Africa. Duck eggs should not be stored in contact with vegetables 
that will be eaten raw, such as carrots, lettuce and cabbage. 
Season and age effects 
Disease patterns vary according to the season. Newcastle Disease is more serious during the dry 
season. In Thailand, Pasteurellosis, Coryza an d streptococcal infections also occur more 
frequently in the dry season, and Fowl Cholera, Colibacillosis and Pseudomoniasis in the rainy 
season (Thitisak, 1992). In northern Nigeria, where Sa'idu et al.  (1994) studied 522 cases 
involving 8 800 chickens, ND accounted for 30 percent of all cases. Of these, 38 percent 
occurred immediately before the dry season of October to December, and only 10 percent 
during the rainy season of July to September. As for Fowl Pox, more outbreaks occurred in the 
rainy season and were highest in the month of July, and about 60 percent of the outbreaks 
affected young chicks. In Thailand, Thitisak et al. (1989) noted that a catastrophic mortality had 
occurred in March in both  1987 and 1988, this being the late dry season when early storms 
cause sudden drops in temperature which chill the birds. They also found that chickens under 
two months of age (normally a rapid growth-rate ph ase), and those over six months of age (in 
the process of becomi ng sexually mature) were more susceptible to infectious diseases (see 
Table 6.6). 
Table 6.7  Cause-specific mortality rates per 100 birds at risk 
Cause of death Age (months) 
 under 2 2 to 6 Over 6 Total 
Infectious Coryza  6.8 0.7 16.8 24.3 
Avian Pasteurellosis  4.6 1.1 2.4 8.1 
Newcastle Disease 4.1 1.4 0.7 6.2 
Fowl Pox 3.2 0.3 0.0 3.5 
Salmonellosis  1.4 0.0 0.3 1.7 
Pseudomonas  0.0 0.3 0.0 0.3 
Total 20.0 3.8 20.2 44.1 
Source: Thitisak et al., 1989, and Janviriyasopak et al., 1989.
Data from surveys in 1987 of 2231 and 3239 birds 
Need for epidemiological studies 
Epidemiological studies of village poultry are essential for the development of appropriate 
village-based poultry health programmes. These have been attempted in many countries, but the 
work undertaken in Thailand (Janviriyasopa et al., 1989) will be used as an example. 
 The North-Eastern Regional Veterinary Resear ch and Diagnostic Centre, Tha Pra, Khon 
Kaen, Thailand, with assistance from the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and 
the Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences of Massey University, New Zealand, embarked 
on a long term-study (“Health and Productivity of Native Chickens”). This was part of a 
programme of epidemiological investigations of factors affecting livestock productivity in the 
region. The objective of the study was to decide on the priority of the problems for which 
control programmes could be developed within the regional Basic Poultry Health Service. 
 In selected villages, about 15 families with flocks of 15 to 20 birds were recruited. In most of 
the villages, vaccinations against ND, Fowl Pox and Fowl Cholera were carried out in order to 
50 Health 
encourage interest. Two villages were paid to represent a totally unvaccinated control 
population. Birds were wing-tagged and grouped by age: 
x under two months; 
x two to six months; 
x six to twelve months; 
x one to two years; 
x two to three years;  and 
x over three years of age. 
During each visit, the number of eggs and chickens were weighed, counted and scored, and 
blood was collected from the wing vein for determination of ND titre and for Pullorum, CRD, 
IB and Gumboro (IBD) tests. Each tagged bird was subjected to health, feather and ectoparasite 
scoring. Sick and dead birds were collected for pathological examinations at the laboratory, in 
order to identify the cause of death or illness, and refrigerators were provided in some villages 
to store dead birds for later examination. Dead  or diseased birds were exchanged for healthy 
birds in order to examine as many as possible, but as the villagers would sometimes eat dead or 
dying birds, most of those exchanged tended to be  the immature birds which owners were less 
willing to eat. By calculating age-specific mortality rates and then determining cause-specific 
rates within each age-group, the contribution of each disease to the mortality within an age-
group was determined. A questionnaire was used to gather additional information. 
The objectives of the survey were to establish: 
x a productivity index; 
x population dynamics; 
x the importance of common diseases, their incidence and prevalence; 
x the average life span of birds; 
x patterns of disease outbreaks;  and 
x the relationship between disease and production levels. 
The parameters used for the survey were: 
x egg production; 
x egg hatching rate; 
x number of deaths in each age group; 
x weight gain of growers;  
x number of birds killed for eating; 
x number of birds sold;  and 
x unexpected losses. 
Some of the results of the survey are seen in Table 6.6 above. Poor management of eggs, 
hatching and young chicks, as well as malnutrition, particularly in the dry season, were found to 
be important predisposing factors to infectious diseases and parasitic infestation (Thitisak et al., 
1989). 
Small-scale poultry production 51
DISEASE CONTROL IN FAMILY FLOCKS 
Non-medical disease control 
The most economical and effective means of preventing non-viral diseases is improved 
management and nutrition, of which the most im portant aspects are hygiene, housing, flock 
structure, and young chick care and feeding. 
Hygiene 
The following simple hygiene measures, which help in disease prevention, were recommended 
by the FAO/UNDP Small Stock Development Pr oject in North Kivu, Zaire (FAO/Anonymous, 
1989): 
x Droppings, feathers and dead birds are sources of pathogens and should be removed 
from overnight housing and the free-rang e compound, and then properly disposed of. 
This will also reduce the incidence of external parasites. 
x New arrivals to the flock should be isolated. Birds bought or received as gifts should be 
quarantined in a basket or cage for at least 15 days; if they remain healthy, they can then 
join the flock. 
x All new arrivals should be treated for ectoparasites and endoparasites as well as 
vaccinated on arrival if possible. 
x Sick birds should be isolated or slaughtered promptly, and dead birds buried. 
x The litter in the poultry house should be turned frequently and changed if wet. 
x Overnight security baskets should be put in the sun to dry  properly or suspended near a 
fire during the rainy season. 
x Feeders and drinkers should be cleaned frequently. 
x Broken pots used as drinkers should be heated over a fire before refilling. 
x The poultry house or basket should be regularly disinfected every two months. 
Housing
Simple improvements and maintenance can be carried out when the poultry house is not in use. 
Important factors in good housing are: 
x Ventilation: if poultry baskets are used for ov ernight housing, they should not be 
covered with cloths or sacks. Huts, coops and baskets should not be placed near 
dunghills or pit latrines. 
x Proper spacing : overcrowding should be avoided, and numbers of poultry should be 
restricted to the space available. Weaned chicks an d growers should be kept in separate 
overnight housing. Laying and brooding nests should be left undisturbed. 
x Separate species : it is better to keep only one species of poultry but if this is not 
possible, the species should be housed se parately overnight to avoid the spread of 
disease.  
Flock structure 
Of all the common free-range poultry species, chickens are the most susceptible to disease. 
Ducks, geese and guinea fowl are often symptom-less carriers of chicken diseases, or have mild 
forms of them. This represen ts a common source of infection in chickens, while the opposite is 
rare. Therefore in mixed flocks special attention should be paid to the health of chickens. 
Separation into different species and age groups may not be possible, but simple devices such as 
creep cage-baskets may be used as a temporary measure for procedures such as vaccination of 
chicks or special feeding. 
52 Health 
Feeding 
The importance of nutrition in flock health is well known. There is a need for further research 
into alternative feeds for rural poultry, which avoid the use of grain for human consumption (see 
Chapter 3). 
Medical disease control 
Simple medical control measures appropriate for free-range village flocks include: 
x Vaccination against Newcastle Disease, Fowl Pox and Fowl Cholera. 
x Deworming for internal parasites in a mixed flock, with a polyvalent poultry dewormer 
such as Piperazine (added to drinking wate r). With guinea fowl, a dewormer against 
Trichomonas should be used. 
x Treatment for external parasites. Insects and other external parasites build up quickly in 
poultry huts, coops and baskets. There are effective traditional methods against 
ectoparasites. All the surfaces of the basket, coop or hut can be sprayed with a suitable 
insecticide, using the same type of hand-pump us ed for spraying mosquitoes. This 
procedure should only be carried out when the house is empty in the morning, and the 
birds should not be allowed back inside until evening. External parasites living on 
poultry can best be treated by adding powdered mothballs (naphthalene) and ash to the 
dust bath area. Ash dust is more abrasive than ordina ry soil dust, and thus removes the 
waxy coating of the insect exoskeleton when the bird takes a dust bath. If enough of the 
waxy coating is removed, the insect will dehydrate and die. 
Newcastle Disease control 
There are three general approaches to the control of ND: 
x Hygiene: this is always important, especially in the control of ND in semi-intensive 
systems where birds are confined within a fenced yard or house. Hygiene includes 
measures such as cleaning, disinfection, limiting access to wild birds, and personal 
hygiene of the farm staff. 
x Slaughter of infected flocks : this is a drastic measure, which has been successfully 
employed in isolated regions or islands that are essentially free of the disease. 
x Vaccination in combination with appropriate hygiene measures: this remains the most 
effective way of controlling ND. 
Newcastle Disease vaccines and vaccination campaigns 
For viral diseases, vaccination is the only form of prevention. A proper vaccination campaign 
can rapidly and significantly minimize losses du e to disease. In Indonesia, after an ND 
vaccination campaign, mortality in village flocks dropped from 50 to 8 percent and the 
population of chickens increased from 900 to 3 500, representing a 250 percent increase 
(Moerad, 1987). ND vaccines are available in either “live” or “dead” forms: 
x Live vaccines are fragile and have very precise ru les for use, requiring a cold chain up to 
the point of application to the bird. Their effectiven ess is reduced if there are residual 
antibodies in the chickens. This is especially important with maternal antibodies, which are 
retained by the newborn chick and protect it for up to ten days. Even a low level of 
maternal antibody reduces the effectiveness of gaining immunity from the vaccine. Group 
vaccination can be administered in very clean  drinking water in very clean drinkers, or by 
aerosol (in enclosed buildings). The conventional live vaccine, Hitchner B1, cannot be 
given in drinking water to village flocks, but can be given using the eye-drop method, 
which has the advantage that each bird receives its dose individually. This has been 
successfully carried out in Morocco, where it led to a considerable reduction in mortality 
(Bell et al.,  1990a). The eye-drop method should be used only if there are veterinary 
personnel available for training vaccinators. 
Small-scale poultry production 53
x Killed vaccines  give good immunity but require priming with a live vaccine for best 
results, unless a natural infection has already served th is purpose. They have been used 
successfully in Burkina Faso (Verger, 1986, and Ouandaogo, 1990). Killed vaccines have 
two disadvantages: th ey must be administered individually by intramuscular injection, 
which requires some veterinary training, and – as with live vaccines given by eye-drops – 
the birds must be caught, a cumbersome task which cannot be avoided with the techniques 
presently available. Killed vaccines have the advantage that they do not require as rigid a 
cold chain as do live vaccines, and, because they have a consequently longer shelf life, 
they can be used in more remote locations. They appear to be most effective in birds that 
have already acquired some degree of immunity from natural NDV exposure or an initial 
live vaccine inoculation. Another advantage of killed vaccine is that the virus-killing 
chemical used in its preparation also acts against all other possible vaccine pollutants, such 
as unwanted viruses, bacteria and other micro-organisms. Killed vaccines are usually 
cheaper than live vaccines because the product is more durable, but this is only viable for 
large flocks. Evidence from Burkina Faso and Niger indicates that because each vial 
contains at least 100 individual doses, there was a high degree of wastage, as the villagers 
only managed to vaccinate a few dozen birds a day at best. Much of the advantage gained 
in efficient manufacturing, packaging and dispatc hing can be lost at this final stage if the 
contents of the vial are not fully utilized. 
Constraints to rural flock vaccination 
The low success rate of ND vaccination is almost entirely due to inactivation of the vaccine 
because of the absence of an effic ient cold chain. This in turn is aggravated by the scattered 
distribution of village flocks, bad road conditions and lack of transport. In Indonesia, the period 
between the vaccine leaving a central laboratory and vaccination in the village can be several 
days. 
 Vaccination programmes should be carried out at appropriate times. There are seasonal 
patterns to outbreaks of ND and Fowl Pox, the diseases for which vaccination campaigns are 
usually carried out. The farming programme should be taken into consideration. In Thailand, for 
example, ND vaccinations are carried out in the dry season when the farmers are not involved 
with rice cultivation (Danvivatanaporn, 1987). 
 It has frequently been said that lack of motivation is a major cause of the low vaccination 
rates in rural areas. To overcome this problem, a pilot project in Thailand organized a training 
course in primary schools for children of 12 yea rs of age. They were introduced to the concept 
of the advantages of vaccination against ND and taught to recognise the simple clinical signs of 
the disease. Another training course for livestoc k volunteers was given to five selected young 
village leaders. Upon return to their village, they gave their services and advice on ND control 
to the village, free of charge. It was hoped that the increased knowledge and commitment would 
result in better motivation of the villagers to develop their own vaccination programmes. 
 In Bangladesh, the subdistrict livestock officer organizes special training in vaccination and 
livestock husbandry, in consultation with the local subdistrict committee chairman and 
members, who then select the farmers and volunteer s for vaccinator training. The course is 
divided into two phases: theoretical and practical. On completion, the vaccinators are supplied 
(at cost) with vacuum flasks and other necessary equipment, to vaccinate their own and other 
villagers’ flocks, for a fee. They then return the empty vials and receive fresh vaccine. The 
Department of Livestock Services runs the livestock disease control programme for small 
farmers as part of its poultry development programme, usually with the assistance of local non-
government organization (NGO) groups (Ban gladesh Department of Livestock Services, 
personal communication 2000). 
The ND V4 vaccine  
This is a new vaccine, which has the following advantages: 
54 Health 
x It is a heat-tolerant vaccine selected from non-vir ulent forms of NDV naturally occurring 
in Australasia. In an experiment conducted in Malawi, young chicks which received the 
vaccine after it had been exposed to ambien t temperature for six weeks developed high 
antibody titres and resisted challenge with a velogenic, viscerotropic ND virus strain 
(Sagild and Spalatin, 1982). 
x After about half of the birds of a household flock are caught and vaccinated, and if all the 
birds are then confined together overnight, the vaccine will spread naturally from 
vaccinated to unvaccinated birds. The antibody response of these “naturally” vaccinated 
is comparable with that of the vaccinated birds (Young, 1991). 
x Unlike conventional vaccines, which cannot be given if the birds are under stress, the 
ND V4 is so mild that it can be given to birds under stress. 
x The vaccine can be administered by mixing with feed, although the eye-drop method of 
inoculation is much more effective. 
Alders et al.  (1994) reported a laboratory vaccine trial with the heat tolerant V4 and the 
Hitchner B1, in which vaccination with the Heat Resistant (HR) V4 gave slightly higher HI 
(Haemaglutination Inhibition) titres than vaccination with the Hitchner vaccine. The live HRV4 
vaccine was used successfully in the control of ND in village chicken flocks in Malawi (Saglid 
and Haresnape, 1987). In these field trials, vaccinated birds showed a good immune response 
when the vaccine was administered through very  clean drinking water in very clean drinkers. 
However, this method can only be used in the dry season, because of the difficulty of confining 
the birds in completely dry conditions during the rainy season. 
 A Heat Resistant derivative of the V4 vaccine added to feed was used successfully in 
Southeast Asia (Copland, 1987). It  did not require individual doses, and it spread between birds 
to some extent. The choice of feed to be used as the vaccine carrier was crucial. Commercial 
feed as a vaccine carrier has two disadvantages: firstly, its composition varies, and certain 
components can prove toxic to the vaccine viru s; and secondly, prepared feeds are expensive, 
and one of the essential factors in a smallholder poultry vaccination scheme must be low cost. 
 In Malaysia, the vaccine is sprayed onto wheat while it is being mixed in a simple, locally 
manufactured auger-driven mixer. Up to 10 000 doses of vaccine can be mixed at a time. The 
feed-virus mixture is then put into small plastic bags, each containing 200 g (enough for 20 
birds). Even after 45 days storage at ambien t temperatures, the bagged vaccine provides up to 
90 percent protection. 
 In other Asian countries where wheat is not r eadily available, rice has been used. Both rice 
and wheat have a water-soluble viral inhibitor in the grain coat; thus washed grain maintains a 
higher virus titre than unwashed grain. Washing is carried out by soaking the grain for 24 hours 
and then mixing the vaccine with the wet grain. At the village level, the required amount of 
washed grain (10 g per bird) is measured into a plastic bag and the vaccine added. After mixing 
thoroughly, the feed-vaccine mixture is fed directly to chickens. It is important to provide creep-
feeding for the chicks and growers, otherwise the older birds get all the vaccine. 
 The V4 strain is being tested in several African countries (Ethiopia, the Gambia, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Nigeria). The first field test of HRV4 (Heat Resistant V4) 
was conducted in the Gambia (Jagne et al., 1991). In July 1993, FAO and the governments of 
the Gambia and Ethiopia signed a Technical Cooperation Programme project agreement, 
"Assistance to Rural Women in protecting their chicken floc ks from Newcastle disease” 
(TCP/RAF/2376T). The objectives were to introduce and ev aluate, under African rural 
conditions, the HRV4 oral vaccine, which had proved effective in Southeast Asia, and to 
involve rural women in the implementation of the project. In both co untries, repeated oral 
vaccination (up to four times at regular intervals) did not generally produce the high immunity 
found in Southeast Asia. However, parallel gro ups inoculated by eye-drop did achieve high 
levels of immunity. 
 In 1995, confined laboratory trials of ND HRV4 feed-based vaccines were carried out in 
Ethiopia. Oral vaccination, administered in barley, wheat and crushed maize feeds, was 
Small-scale poultry production 55
compared with eye-drop vaccination and with an unvaccinated control. Eight days after the 
birds were challenged by the ND virus, the survival rates were: 80 percent of the eye-drop 
vaccination group; 20 percent of the oral vaccina tion groups; and none of the control group. Of 
the three feeds used in the oral vaccination trials, barley proved to be the most efficient vaccine 
carrier in terms of providing disease resistance, followed by maize and lastly wheat. 
 Zimbabwe was free of ND from 1986 until 1994, when suddenly infection was introduced 
from South Africa. Because of unrestricted poultry transport, it spread rapidly across most of 
the country. During 1994/95, ten million rural chickens nationwide were vaccinated at a project 
cost of US$1.50 per bird. In early 1996, a FAO-assisted Technical Cooperation Programme was 
initiated to establish a community-based programme for the prevention of ND epidemics in 
rural chickens. The approach combined the immediate administration of the V4 vaccine using 
the conventional eye-drop vaccination method  with community-based trials using the feed-
mixed oral method under Zimbabwe conditions. Thus it was hoped to avert other epidemics and 
generate data for planning regular feed-based vaccination of rural chickens as part of the 
veterinary extension service. 
 Although V4 has shown promising results in overcoming the major constraints associated 
with ND vaccination, there are still problems with its use in scavenging systems at the village 
level, where feeding is irregular and poultry are hatched, bought and sold throughout the year. 
In all countries, laboratory trials to assess various feeds as carriers and to familiarize technicians 
with the vaccine and virulent challenge systems should be conducted before field trials. 
Production data should be collected before, during and after vaccination. This is essential to 
evaluate the efficiency of vaccination. 
Traditional poultry disease control in Africa 
Traditional treatment and control of disease is important, as most developing countries cannot 
afford to import or subsidize veterinary drugs and vaccines for smallholder farms. There is also 
increasing concern about the effect of synthetic drugs on animals and the environment. Ojeniyi 
(1985) found a correlation between the use of antibiotics and drug resistance among E. coli 
strains isolated from intensively managed poultry at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria. All 1248 
E. coli strains from the University poultry farm, and 2196  strains from a commercial poultry 
farm in Ibadan, were resistant to tetracycline, st reptomycin and sulphonamid e. In contrast, all 
2284 strains isolated from free-range town and village poultry were sensitive to these drugs. 
 Most of the information presented below on traditional medicine used for poultry has been 
collected informally (Bizimana, 1994), and has not been scientifically tested. The main reason 
for its inclusion here is to encourage formal research. 
Viral diseases 
x Newcastle Disease: in Nigeria, either Lageneria vulgaris or the bark of Parkia filicoidea 
are given to the flock in drinking water (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). In Zimbabwe, the 
leaves of Cassia didymobotrya or the latex of Euphorbia matabelensis are given in 
drinking water (Chavunduka, 1976). In the Un ited Republic of Tanzania, in the regions 
of Arusha and Kilimanjaro, the stem of Euphorbia candelabrum Kotschy var. 
candelabrum or the fruit of Capsicum annuum together with the leaves of Iboza 
multiflora are given (Minja, 1989). 
x Fowl pox: in Zimbabwe, the leaves of Aloe excelsa are soaked and the extracted fluid is 
added to drinking water (Chavunduka , 1976). A poultry disease named “ Yoko yoko” by 
the Fulani of Mauritania, Mali and Senegal, is a serious epidemic, affecting hens of all 
ages. The exact cause of the disease is unkn own, but Ba (1982) suggested that it might 
be a type of Fowl Pox. The signs and symptoms, as described by the Fulani, are 
dejection, breathing difficulties with the emission of the sound 'yok yok' and sneezing. 
Obstruction of the nostrils by yellowish crusts makes th e birds breathe through their 
beaks, which are also encrusted. Lack of appetite and purulent conjunctivitis have also 
been noted. Eventually, the birds suffocate and die. The mortality rate can be as high as 
100 percent in growing chickens, but some adults survive. The birds are systematically 
56 Health 
slaughtered and the hen house burnt to pr event spread. The symptoms, as described 
above, are indicative of the “wet” form of Fowl Pox, where eventually the bird 
suffocates from a cheesy growth in the trachea. The pox lesions are sometimes less 
obvious in this type of Fowl Pox disease, but they can be found on close examination. 
x Colds: in Nigeria, Hibiscus subdariffia is pounded, mixed with drinking water and given 
to birds with ruffled feathers (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). 
Protozoan diseases 
Coccidiosis: in Nigeria, Lageneria vulgaris is dipped in the flocks’ drinking water (Nwude and 
Ibrahim, 1980). 
Bacterial diseases 
Fowl Cholera: in Nigeria, the fruit of Adansonia digitata is broken and soaked in the birds' 
drinking water. The fruit of Capsicum annuum is mixed with soot from the ceilings of thatched 
buildings (Hausa: Kunkunniya) and given in drinking water (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). 
Metabolic and infectious diseases 
x Abdominal disorders : in Nigeria, the young leaves of Boswellia dalzelii  are chopped 
and soaked in water, and the extracted fluid is given as a diarrhoea treatment (Nwude and 
Ibrahim, 1980). In South  Africa (Natal Province), Leonotis leonurus  Ait.f. is given to 
treat both yellow and green diarrhoea (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962). In Southern 
Africa, farmers use a cold infusion of the leaves of Aloe saponaria Haw. to treat enteritis 
and indigestion in poultry (Watt and Breyer-Brand wijk, 1962). In West Africa, the 
chopped leaves of Pergularia extensa  are fed to turkeys suffering from diarrhoea 
(Dalziel, 1937). In Zimbabwe, the bulb of Adenium multiflora is soaked in water for 12 
hours, after which the sick animals are drenched to treat for bloody and watery diarrhoea. 
For the same purpose, the latex of Aloe chabandii or Euphorbia matabelensis is given in 
drinking water (Chavunduka, 1976). 
x Blood in the excreta : in Zimbabwe, the bark of Cussonia arborea is soaked in water, 
and the sick birds are drenched with the fluid (Chavunduka, 1976). 
Poor growth and low production 
In Nigeria, the fruit of Cucumis pustulatus is mixed with bran and placed in drinking water to 
help growth, prevent disease and increase egg production. The fruit of Cyperus articulatus  is 
also placed in drinking water (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). In West Africa, the fruit of Cucumis
prophetarum or C. pustulatus is placed in drinking water to help gr owth, prevent disease, 
discourage predatory hawks and increase egg production (Dalziel, 1937). 
Ectoparasites
x Various ectoparasites and parasitic diseases: in Nigeria, the dried leaves and twigs of 
Guiera senegalensis Lam. are burned in poultry houses to reduce ectoparasites (Nwude 
and Ibrahim, 1980). In Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, Thamnosma africana  Engl. is placed in 
chicken pens to repel fleas and ants (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962). 
x Lice: in Nigeria, the leaves of Bandeiraea simplicifolia are placed in hen houses to kill 
lice (Dalziel, 1937; Nwude and lbrahim, 19 80). Ash from the burnt leaves of Nicotiana 
rustica, N. tabacum or Carica papaya is rubbed into feathers to protect against 
infestation (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). In Senegal, the leaves of Calotropis procera 
Ait.f. are used to kill lice on poultry (Dalziel, 1937; Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962). 
Endoparasites 
Worms: in Nigeria, the fruits of Cucumis prophetarum and Solanum nodiflorum are used by the 
Hausa people to treat poultry for worms (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). 
Small-scale poultry production 57
Others 
Lameness in ducks: in Nigeria, the Hausa people pulverize the leaves of Momordica balsamina 
and mix them with feed to treat ducks for lameness (Nwude and Ibrahim, 1980). 
Small-scale poultry production 59
Chapter 7 
Breed Improvement 
Strategies to develop poultry breeds suitable for family poultry smallholders in tropical 
countries must differ from those used in intensive production, and should focus on improving 
indigenous breeds while also making use of pu re exotic and cross-bred chickens where 
appropriate. 
 Conservation of loca l breeds possessing genetic variations specific to the particular 
environment is essential for sustainable development. Although they exist as numerically small 
populations, local breeds are not only highly adapted to the natural environment, but are also an 
integral part of the lifestyle of the rural people. People, livestock and environment form a 
delicately balanced but susta inable ecosystem, and thus the potential impact of any intervention 
to improve production in the traditional system should be predetermined. The situation is less 
sensitive in peri-urban, industrial and small-scale intensive poultry pr oduction, in which rapid 
improvements can be ach ieved through well-designe d development programmes. The intensive 
poultry production sector, however, is generally much smaller than the family poultry sector in 
virtually all developing countries. 
STRATEGIES FOR BREED IMPROVEMENT 
The following two rules should be incorporated into breeding strategies: 
x Germplasm in traditional conditions should not be modified until management and 
housing have been improved and, even then, selection should be restricted to local 
breeds. 
x When technical conditions are optimum and a ready market exists for the products, then 
improved breeds, crosses and hybrid strains that have been selected for high performance 
can be introduced into the peri-urban system, even at small-scale levels. 
The most common method of improving the loca l gene pool is crossing  indigenous and exotic 
birds, and then leaving the hybrid offspring to natu ral selection. Pure-bred or hybrid cockerels 
(or pullets) selected for greater meat or egg production are introduced into local flocks, usually 
in order to increase egg production. It is im portant to note that improved growth (for meat 
production) and high egg production are genetically  incompatible in the same bird. The genetic 
traits are negatively correlated, which means that selection for one trait will reduce the other. 
Cockerel or pullet exchange 
An example of this type of strategy is a flock of indigenous local hens laying 50 eggs a year and 
beginning to lay at 25 weeks of age, crossed with “improved breed” cockerels, which have a 
genetic breed potential of 250 eggs a year, with hens beginning to lay at 21 weeks. The results 
are cross-bred hybrid pullets beginning to lay at 24 weeks, with a genetic potential of laying 200 
eggs per year. The first generation hybrid cross-breed has a higher theoretical genetic potential 
(genotype) than the average (150) of the two pa rent breeds, due to the effect of hybrid vigour. 
However, unless management (e specially in the area of nutrition) is improved, this genetic 
potential will not be realized by the hybrid cross-breed in actual practice in the environment. 
 If subsequent generations of the hybrid cross-bred pullets are mated (back-crossed) again 
with the same “improved breed” cocker el, the genetic potential for increased production is 
raised, although at a slower rate (as hybrid vigo ur only works with first-time crossing). With 
each generation, higher levels of management (including the provision of properly balanced 
feeds) are required to achieve this potential. 
60 Breed Improvement
 If the hybrid cross-breeds mate among themse lves, however, potential production falls in the 
very next generation to the average potential of the two original genotypes, even if management 
could support the higher hybrid level. 
 The use of cockerels in this way is the basis for the Cock or Cockerel Exchange Programme 
(CEP) or Opération Coq, which ha s been implemented in almost all tropical countries. 
Households exchange all their local cockerels for a few improved cockerels, which are then 
raised to maturity to allow them to adapt to local conditions. 
 In some cases, a Pullet Exchange or Hybrid Hatchable Eggs Programme is used. These 
approaches were used extensively from the early 1930s until the 1960s, by which time urban 
development had begun to give rise to peri-urban, intensive, small- to medium-scale poultry 
production, which makes use of imported commercial breeds and technology. 
 The gradual replacement of local genes through cross-breeding and artificial selection has 
been the basis of initial development in many countries (Omeje and Nwosu, 1986; Coligado et
al., 1986). 
 Although many strategies deemed appropriate for smallholder poultry production systems 
have been implemented, most have not succeeded, due to a lack of management input to support 
the improved potential.
Replacement of all indigenous breeds 
The use of hybrid chickens under free-range rural conditions has often been studied, notably in 
Zimbabwe (Huchzermeyer, 1973), and in Sri Lanka, Zambia and Nicaragua (Roberts and 
Senaratne, 1992; de Vries, 1995). 
 It has consistently been found that entire flock replacement programmes lead to increased 
egg and meat production, but only where management supplies good nutrition and veterinary 
hygiene. There is, however, one great disadvantage, in that the use of commercial hybrids to 
increase egg production necessarily eliminates broodiness of hens, due to the negative genetic 
correlation between these two factors. For this reason, complete replacement of local birds 
should not be considered unless a reliable local supply of day-old chicks (of an appropriate 
breed) is available. 
Selection within local breeds 
Production traits of local breeds 
The genetic development of local breeds and varieties in developing countries first requires 
proper documentation of their productive and reproductive performance. The main production 
characteristics of local breeds are: 
x small body size (low nutritional maintenance requirement); 
x lateness in maturing (up to 36 weeks of age); 
x low performance in egg numbers (20 to 50) and egg size (25 to 45 g); 
x small clutch sizes (two to ten eggs);  and 
x long pauses between laying of clutches and a predominant inclination to broodiness. 
 For rural smallholder extensive systems, meat production cannot be separated from egg or 
chick production, and thus a highly broody (with consequent low egg production), low body-
weight (low-feed requirement) bird is best for survival under these conditions. Surplus 
cockerels, whatever they weigh, are usually sold for meat when they reach sexual maturity at 
three to four months of age. Under rural smallholder extensive systems, there is little 
reproductive control of the hens, as  they brood their own chicks for continuous regeneration of 
the flock. The egg brooding (inc ubation) and chick rearing activ ity increases the reproductive 
cycle length by 58 days to about 74 days in total: 
 16 days for egg laying and clutch formation + 21  days for hatching + 37 days (5.3 weeks) for 
chick rearing = 74 days  
Small-scale poultry production 61
 Source: Horst, 1990b 
Thus, most hens can produce chicks about four to five times per year, and only four times if the 
rearing period is extended to eight weeks. As malnutrition, infections, predators and accidents 
result in mortality rates of 60 to 70 percent during rearing, virtually all eggs are used for 
reproduction. With four to five reproductive cycles per year, only about nine replacement 
pullets may be obtained.  
 Fertility and hatchability are also high in local birds. They generally adapt well to 
unfavourable management conditions, and resistance to prevailing diseases is usually assumed 
to be high, although juvenile and sometimes adult mortality rates can be high in extensive 
production systems. 
 Considerable genetic differences exist between different regional and continental populations 
of indigenous chickens, and production rates of  local populations should be evaluated before 
introducing development programmes. 
Selection programmes for local breeds 
Although better manageme nt procedures can significantly improve the performance of local 
birds, some feel there is also a need for genetic selection (Nwosu, 1979).     Pure-breeding and 
selection programmes have been developed in Ba ngladesh (Ahmad and Hashnath, 1983), 
although not implemented in the field. Both of the abov e groups conclu ded that although 
improvement of local poultry breeds would be beneficial, it is essential to evaluate breeds and 
their crosses before undertaking a breeding strategy. 
 Research conducted in the United Republic of Tanzania (Katule, 1991) concluded that 
selection for dual-purpose characteristics within individual local populations is both time-
consuming and costly. Cross-breeding with improved breeds is recommended, followed by 
selection in the composite population.
 Although consumer preference in most developin g countries is for dual-purpose breeds, it is 
important to restate that in the same bird, the traits of increased egg production and increased 
broodiness are genetically incompatible, as are the traits of high egg production and high meat 
production. Selection for any trait within these pairs will reduce the other trait of that pair. 
Modifying local breeds using major gene types 
The use of single or combined dominant genes for feather restriction (Na) and feathering 
structure (F), as well as the sex-linked recessive ge ne for reduced body size (dw), has been 
found to be particularly relevant for the tropics (Horst, 1989; Haaren-Kiso  et al. , 1995). 
Research into the effects of these genes on economic factors has been undertaken in Malaysia 
(Khadijah, 1988; Mathur and Horst, 1989). For example, the feather restriction (Na) or Naked 
Neck gene results in 40 percen t less feather coverag e overall, with the lower neck appearing 
almost “naked”. This considerably reduces the need for dietary nutrition to supply protein input 
for feather production, and protein is a limiting factor in many scavenger feed resource bases. 
Barua et al., (1998) has reviewed the available info rmation on the performance of indigenous 
Naked Neck fowl in the hope that it will draw the attention of scientists worldwide to its 
interesting characteristics and facilitate future research. 
 The incorporation of such genes could be si gnificant in the development of appropriate 
breeds and strains for smallholder poultry production in the tropics. There are now seven 
potentially useful major genes: 
x Na - naked neck (autosomal -A); 
x Dw - dwarf (sex-linked -S); 
x K - slow feathering (S); 
x Fa - Fayoumi (A); 
62 Breed Improvement
x F - frizzle (A); 
x H - silky (A);  and 
x Fm - fibro-melanosis (A). 
The use of major genes to improve productivity in smallholder poultry breeding programmes 
has been researched in various tropical countries (including Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, Bolivia, India, Cameroon and Nigeria). 
 Other morphological traits that allow better heat dissipation include large combs, large 
wattles and long legs. Gene coding for these traits, which are not major genes but the result of 
multiple genes and their interactions, could also be considered for incorporation into the 
development of high performance local birds for the tropics. 
BETTER PRODUCTION:  BY BREEDING OR MANAGEMENT? 
Family poultry is well integrated into most village farming systems, with local breeds 
representing 40 to 70 percent of the  national meat and egg supply in most tropical countries. 
Because of their scavenger adaptability, production ability and low cost, local breeds are kept 
by rural smallholders, landless farmers and industrial labour ers. It is difficult to imagine birds 
better adapted for survival under scavenger free-range conditions than the breeds that have 
already evolved under those very same conditions, and are still surviving as proof of their 
ability to do so. However, there does remain a considerable and largely unexploited potential for 
increased production from local breeds through improved management. 
 The critical management objective for scavenger free-range systems is to reduce the high 
mortality in both growing and adult age groups, but especially the 60 to 70 percent mortality in 
the growers. This high mortality means that many eggs laid by the hen need to be used for 
reproduction to maintain flock size, instead of for sale or  consumption. It also means that many 
birds that die could instead be sold or consumed as meat. 
 The problem with local breeds, as outlined above, is not inherently low egg production or 
low meat production, but high mortality. Breed improvement to increase meat or egg production 
would not solve the health and nutrition management problems. However, increased egg 
production (by breed improvement) would create  a new problem – lack of broodiness in the 
flock – which would force the smallholder to buy stock rather than have the hen brood and rear 
her own. 
 Mortality can be significantly reduced through increasing farmer awareness of health needs, 
through the provision of vaccine (especially  for Newcastle Disease) an d through improving the 
nutrition of growing stock (for example, by providing creep feeding systems). These are the 
most important improvements to management activities that will enable to the farmer to best 
exploit the existing potential of local breeds under scavenging free-range conditions. 
 If management resources available to the smallholder or landless farmer increase to the 
extent of a local supply of balanced poultry feed, the options open to his income-generating 
ability are increased. However, the answer is not to confine local breeds in intensive 
management systems. The performance of local breeds will increase slightly under cage or deep 
litter management (Akinokun, 1975; Oluyemi, 1979; Nwosu, 1979) but, because the genetic 
potential for egg production (or meat production) of local breeds is lower than that of 
commercial hybrids, the same investment in inte nsive management will achieve a much  higher 
production result by using commercial hybrids. 
 If balanced feed, good health-care supplies and day-old chicks of hybrid varieties are locally 
available, then intensive poultry management is an option. If these are not available, raising 
local breeds under scavenger free-range systems is still the best choice. 
 The vast potential for increasing income generatio n from scavenger free-range family 
poultry clearly lies in the management area of reducing mortality in growing chickens. This 
alone is sufficient challenge fo r the already overstretched res ources of government and NGO 
field extension staff in developing countries. 
Small-scale poultry production 63
The potential for breed improvement is a factor to be considered in the future, but only when 
the more immediate objective of reducing mortality is attained. Meanwhile efforts should be 
continued to preserve germplasm as a resource for the future. 
Small-scale poultry production 65
Chapter 8 
Production Economics 
The agricultural subsector of animal production is part of a complex interdependent farming 
system. Analysis of livestock pr oduction cannot be based solely on  input and output, but must 
also take into consideration other farming activities. The interaction between animal production 
and other subsectors can be complementary, as in the use of manure; or competitive, as in the 
allocation of land to crops or livestock grazing. 
 The farming system as a whole, and animal production in particular, is influenced by 
external factors (including government policy on rural development, livestock development 
programmes and marketing), which must be considered in any analysis or evaluation. 
DEFINITION AND ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION COSTS 
The farming system is defined as the combination of all farm enterprises/subsystems, 
management and farmer objectives and the interaction between them. It is a decision-making 
and land-use unit, comprising the farming househ old and the crop and livestock systems, which 
transforms land, labour, management and capital into products that can be consumed or sold. 
 Enterprises/subsystems are defined as the different subdivisions of the farming system, each 
producing one kind of crop or livestock product. In the case of family poultry, the products are 
poultry meat and eggs, with manure as a by-product. The harvesting of family poultry for home 
consumption and sale can be considered as the management of a standing resource for economic 
yield. In this respect, the economic principles applying to the management of fauna, parklands, 
fisheries, wood and timber forests and rangelands are more appropriate than the economic 
concepts more commonly applied to the labour and capital-dependent livestock production and 
other commercial farming industries. 
METHODS AND CRITERIA FOR COST CALCULATION 
The cost of production can be seen from vari ous angles. The inputs may be external (Non-
Factor costs) or internal (Factor costs). Internal input is under the control of the farming 
household, and includes land, labour, management and capital. The cash involved in production 
represents either Cash (Paid) Costs or Non-Cash  (Calculated) Costs. Another way to categorize 
the costs is to distinguish Variable Costs from Fixed Costs. Variable costs rise and fall with the 
size of the output and the level of the op eration. Variable costs (for items such as feed, vaccine 
and casual labour) can be controlled to some ex tent and are not incurred when there is no 
production. Fixed costs (for items such as taxes, insurance, interest, and depreciation on 
buildings and equipment), are incurred whether or not there is any output. 
 The Opportunity Cost principle is applied in farm cost accounting. Opportunity costs can be 
defined as the "income that would have been generated if the productio n resource/input/factor 
were put to the next best alternative use". Many farm enterprises/subsystems yield more than 
one product. Poultry produce eggs, meat and manu re. When calculating the cost-price per unit 
of production, the cash value of the by-products (sold externally or used as a substitute in 
another enterprise/subsystem of the  farm), must be subtracted from the Total Gross Costs. This 
will result in the Total Net Costs. For the cost-price per unit of production, the Total Net Costs 
must be divided by the total number of units of production. 
 The cost-price calculation model splits production costs into two categories: Paid Costs and 
Calculated Costs. Paid costs involve actual payment in cash or kind for inputs or services used. 
Calculated costs are determined using mathematical formulae, and include the following:  
x depreciation on the poultry house and equipment; 
x interest on cash in hand and personal capita l used to construct the poultry house and 
purchase equipment, birds and feed; 
66 Production economics
x maintenance of the poultry house and equipment;  and 
x labour supplied by the farm family. 
Calculated Costs include Opportunity Costs as related to the national economy: for example, 
unemployment (including hidden un employment) and high rates of  devaluation of the national 
currency. These form a part of the socio-economic reality for the smallholder, and influence the 
Opportunity Cost of labour (reduced by high unemployment) and of capital (which tends to 
move towards zero when the rate of curr ency devaluation is higher than the interest rate). By 
making use of locally available and renewable materials for poultry housing and equipment, 
family poultry producers minimize the introduction of external capital into their enterprise. 
 Large-scale poultry prod uction cannot really be compared with smallholder family poultry, 
because smallholders often face such constraints as the absence of organized marketing systems 
and the lack of price rewards for produce quality and uniformity. Therefore, the cost-price 
calculation for large-scale poultr y production (and also that for free-range commercial poultry 
production) may not be applicable to smallholder family poultry systems without modifications. 
 Elson (1992) showed that for layers, production costs (per dozen eggs produced) increased 
with space allowance (sto ck density) per hen. The minimum stock density allowed in the EC 
(under EEC Council directive 1988/66) is 22 birds/m 2 (450 cm 2/bird). The production cost for 
birds housed in laying cages at this density is used as a baseline. The percent increases in cost 
over this baseline (each with their associated management system) are: 
x 5 percent for aviaries; 
x 7–12 percent for percheries (tiered wire floor aviaries) at 20 birds/m2;
x 15 percent for cages at 20 birds/m2 (750 cm2/bird);
x 21 percent for deep litter systems at 7 birds/m2;
x 30 percent for straw yards at 3 birds/m2;
x 35 percent for semi-intensive systems at 0.1 birds/m2 (1000 birds/ha);  
x 50 percent for free-range systems at 0.04 birds/m2 (400 birds/ha). 
A comparison of the EC cage minimum as a base, with perchery and free-range alternatives, is 
shown in Table 8.1.  
(Calculations were made using feed at £140/tonne; pullets at £2.35 each; old hens at 24.2p/kg) 
A BROADER ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS 
All economic activity consists of transforming resources (land, labour and capital) into goods 
and services which serve the needs and desires of people. Much of the quantitative assessment 
in cost-benefit analysis is simple accountancy: assigning monetary values to various measured 
or estimated physical quantities, categorizing them under a cost or benefit heading, adding them 
up, and finally comparing the totals. Proper eco nomic analysis should provide a framework by 
which the benefits of production are shown in th e economic system, and how these benefits are 
valued by society. This can only be done with a "before and after" or "with or without" analysis. 
Benefits can be measured in two ways: 
x by a technical component which represents the higher productivity of resources used (and 
hence reduced unit costs) in supplying poultry products; and 
x an economic component which reflects the value placed by society on those supplies. 
Small-scale poultry production 67
Table 8.1 Performance and production costs of three alternative systems in the United Kingdom  
System 
Cage Perch Free-range 
Performance 
Stock density 22 20 0.04 
Eggs per hen housed 276 265 252 
Feed intake, g/bird/day 115 116 135 
Mortality, % 5 5 8 
Old hen weight, kg 2.2 2.2 2.3 
No of birds/worker 20 000 10 000 2 500 
Production costs (pence per dozen eggs) 
Feed 25.5 27.8 32.8 
Bird depreciation 7.9 8.4 8.6 
Labour 1.5 3.2 13.3 
Electricity 1.2 1.2 0.7 
Medication 0.1 0.1 0.2 
Other costs 1.1 1.2 1.3 
Total 37.4 41.8 56.9 
Source: Elson (1992), as quoted by Tucker  (1989) 
The technical effects are demonstrated in an economic analysis as a shift of the supply curve - 
the basic relationship showing the minimum price at which different levels of production can be 
made available to the market. This is shown in Figure 8.1 as the downward shift in the curve S 0
to S1. The value placed on this change in potential availability is then entirely dependent on the 
demand for poultry products. With rising demand for these products, additional supplies 
become expensive, and therefore the extra production translates into a substantial gain in 
benefits to the community. It can be argued that this usually happens in de veloping countries 
where, compared to the staple diet, poultry products are a luxury commodity with a relatively 
higher value. Hence, the demand curve D shows that the quantity demanded is highly 
responsive to price and income changes, with additional consumption causing little decrease in 
value. The demand for poultry products is price/income elastic. 
 This simple model highlights the overall economic im pact of higher poultry production as 
manifested on the market for poultry products.  Production and consumption rise from Q
0 to Q1
but the average price paid by consumers (and received by producers) falls from P 0 to P 1.
Consumers gain significantly, reaping the benefits of both greater supplies and lower prices. 
Producers also gain. Although unit costs fall, the increase in production compensates for the 
price reduction and, as evident from the diag ram, total revenue received by producers, (P 1Q1) is 
greater than the previous P0Q0.
 The overall net economic benefit from impr oved family poultry production technology is 
represented by the size of the shaded area. It is this net economic benefit that an economic 
analysis of family poultry development schemes and programmes should be seeking to estimate. 
68 Production economics
Fig. 8.2 A representation of the market for poultry products from smallholders 
$
price
per
unit
PO
PI
QO QI
SO
SI
DB
quantity supplied / demanded
Image for demand-supply curve 
Small-scale poultry production 69
Chapter 9 
Marketing
As a country develops, more of its consuming population lose touch with the village and food 
producers. Thus more specialised marketing services are needed. Farm produce must be 
collected, packed and transported in good condition to the cities and distributed to retailers near 
consumers’ homes. This also calls for grading and storage of the product. The more developed 
the country becomes; the greater is the variety of products that can be economically produced. 
All this must be provided at a cost that consumers can afford. 
 A study of existing marketing systems in a country will often reveal how they have evolved 
to their present state. Many dev eloping countries do not have refrigeration as a factor in their 
storage, either during transport, retail or cons umer household stages. For this reason, poultry 
meat is purchased live, and slaughtered immediately before consumption. Also, eggs are often 
retailed with a means for the buyer to check their quality before buying, either by “candling” (to 
see the internal quality with a lantern or battery-torch) or a bucket of water (to test the egg’s age 
by the floatation method). Both methods essentially test for the size of the air-cell situated at the 
blunt end of the egg, which increases in size as moisture is lost from the egg. With a bigger air-
cell, there is more floatation. 
 In developing countries, transport of eggs and poultry from the village to the city usually 
begins with a purchase by a middleman dealer, direct from the household, or from small locally 
held weekly markets. Baskets with layers of straw protect the eggs from breakage, and other 
types of baskets are used to carry live birds. Bullock carts are still used in many countries for 
transport of both live poultry and eggs to larger community centres. The roofs of buses or trains 
replace these slower vehicles as transport systems develop. Marketing quality considerations for 
live birds are usually concerned with weight loss in the bird from dehydration during transport. 
These are easily resolved by providing drinking water during the trip, and travelling during the 
cool part of the day when possible. Egg quality considerations are more complex and are dealt 
with in the second half of this chapter. 
 Improved marketing programmes must add no more cost to the product than the consumer 
can afford. Imp ortant marketing imp rovements can often be simply made by making small 
corrections to already existing handling, transport, packaging, grading and storage methods. 
 Marketing organisations generally come into being very gradually, and must be appropriate 
for the background, character and education of the people concerned. Plans for radical changes, 
which do not take sufficient account of soc ial and economic environments, are likely to fail. 
Thus any improvement programme should be desi gned to achieve desirable modifications in 
existing commercial facilities (and their economic and legal framework) by a process of steady 
growth. 
 As a country develops, the task of marketing eggs and poultry will still involve the collection 
of live poultry and eggs from farmers, transportin g them to a grading, packing or processing 
plant, grading and standardisin g the poultry meat and eggs, processing them and packaging 
them into more useful forms, storing them (preferably under refrigeration), moving them 
through wholesale and retail channels and delivering them to consumers at a convenient time 
and place. 
 This chapter provides a brief outline with some practical information and advice to those 
who are immediately concerned with egg and poultry marketing considerations. For a more 
detailed examination of marketing, the reader is referred to FAO Marketing Guide Nº 4 
"Marketing eggs and poultry" (1961), from which some of the following material is taken. 
70 Marketing 
FACTORS AFFECTING DEMAND FOR POULTRY MEAT AND EGGS 
Ceremonial and traditional aspects 
In traditional societies, poultry are often used for ceremonies, sacrifices and gifts. What follows 
are some traditional aspects of poultry keeping from the Mossi of Burkina Faso (West Africa), 
the Mamprusi of northern Ghana, and Bangladeshi and Malay farmers in South Asia. 
 Among the Mossi people when no poultry  is available (such as after a Newcastle Disease 
outbreak), to meet customary family obligations, the  household must purchase or borrow a bird. 
Chickens are given to convey value to a relationship, or to offer thanks for a favour or help 
(such as from government officials). For mo st socio-cultural and religious purposes, the 
required sex and colour of fowls are also prescribed. For example, a family will give a white 
cockerel when an agreement for marriage is reached. 
 The consumption of eggs in Mossi villages is uncommon. There is a strong belief that a child 
who regularly eats eggs will become a thief, reasoning that the good taste of eggs will make the 
child want to eat eggs often. The only eggs consumed are those that fail to hatch under broody 
hens. These are boiled and then eaten. Chicken eggs, unlike guinea fowl eggs, are not part of the 
trade in poultry products, since all eggs are required for hatching to maintain the flock (given 
the normally high losses during rearing). Dealers  from urban areas reflect the demand for 
village eggs. The eggs are often bought by small food stall merchants who boil the eggs and 
resell them as snack food. A considerable number of guinea fowl eggs are collected by the 
Mossi for sale, most of which find their way to the cities via village markets, where dealers buy 
the eggs. 
 The Mamprusi society in northern Ghana has a variety of uses for poultry products. Chicken 
cocks are the most popular sacrificial animals. Guinea fowl cocks are not used. The colour of 
the bird is important. A red cock is sacrificed to ask for rain or a good harvest; a white cock is 
used to convey value in relationships, and a black cock is used to ask for protection against 
disease, war or quarrels. Because of these customs, red, white and black cocks have double the 
value of cocks of other colours. 
 The sale of young birds and eggs takes place in the Mamprusi village markets. Prices 
fluctuate during the year, and are low during the pre-harvest season, when the granaries are 
empty and the crops are still growing and thus cash is less available. At such times, traders from 
the south come to buy for resale in the cities. Sometimes, middlemen dealers are involved. They 
buy the birds in the villages and sell them at markets or to city-based traders. The sale of poultry 
products from Mamprusi households contributes  about 15 percent to Mamprusi annual cash 
income. 
 Poultry consumption by the household is rare, as  most birds are sold for income generation. 
In Mamprusi society, women, circumcised girls and first-born children do not consume eggs or 
meat. These products are only eaten by elderly men, male visitors and young children. The 
reasons are not fully understood. Some Mamprusi  women believe that during pregnancy, their 
behaviour (including their food choices) can affect their unborn child. 
 In Bangladesh, eggs and meat are consumed mainly by men and boys, and very rarely by 
women and girls. Low-income groups generally do  not consume eggs or meat. These products 
are sold, and from the proceeds, essential items are purchased, such as carbohydrate and low-
cost vegetable protein foods. 
 Guinea fowl, more than chicken, are given as gifts to visitors. To give a gift is considered to 
be a wealth-increasing action as well as an act that conveys value  on the receiver. Farmers often 
save for agricultural equipment or other materials and small livestock is used as a savings 
account. The offspring, like chicks, are considered to be the interest on the savings. 
 In many parts of Africa, birds are sold to  meet unforeseen expenses, for example, to buy the 
beer and kola-nuts customarily given to gravediggers when a family member dies. The birds 
usually sold from the village flock are: surplus males (cockerels and cocks); pullets; old hens; 
non-productive hens; large-sized birds and sick bir ds. Young birds are often sold just before the 
onset of the high-risk period for Newcastle Disease. 
Small-scale poultry production 71
Traditional taste values placed on poultry meat 
It is important to understand traditional taste values and their effect on market demand. The 
market price for free-range birds for meat is usually stable because:  
x the meat is considered tastier and stronger flavoured than commercial broiler meat; 
x the meat (muscle tissue) is tougher, and retains its texture when prepared in dishes 
requiring longer cooking;  and 
x the birds are not fed with compounded feed which may contain antibiotics, anti-mould 
compounds, enzymes, sulpha drugs and other medicines or synthetic chemicals. 
In eastern Asia, it is believed that chickens fe d with chemicals and drugs have poorer 
therapeutic value, as they do not combine well with ginseng and other oriental herbs used in 
making soups, especially steamed types. For this type  of soup, younger pullets are preferred and 
thus they fetch a higher price than do the cockerels. The female is said to be more beneficial and 
the meat tastier. Steamed chicken soup is believed to provide virility and vigour. It is commonly 
recommended in Malaysia for pregnant women and for those recovering from sickness. 
 In the case of large-scale commercial ayam kampung (local village chicken) production in 
Malaysia, local bir ds are confined and fed on commercial rations but they fetch lower prices 
than free-range local birds. Such large-scale produ ction has an affect on the market value of all 
local birds, as purchasers have difficulty  distinguishing between genuine free-range and 
commercially fed local birds. However, the price of ayam kampung continues to hold a margin 
above that of commercial meat chickens. The introduction of more appropriate methods of 
Newcastle Disease vaccination in Malaysia will reduce mortality at the village level which may 
also stimulate further interest in family poultry production. If this happens, there will be an 
increase in the supply of local free-range poultry products to the market, and the price of the 
ayam kampung product (from large-scale commercial production) may fall further. 
Carcass parts and organ meats 
 The value of birds for sale in developing countries depends firstly on the available supply, 
secondly on the age and sex of the birds, and thirdly on their size or weight. Young birds, 
especially cockerels up to six months of age (weigh ing up to one kilogram live weight), are 
usually preferred by consumers. This is because larger birds are more expensive for most 
households, and smaller birds are more tender and have the same preferred portions (drumsticks 
for example). Table 9.1 shows carcass characteristics of the local village chicken in Bangladesh. 
Table 9.1 Product characteristics of indigenous scavenging chickens in Bangladesh 
Characteristic Mean 
Live weight, kg 1.14 
Carcass weight, %  55 
Eggs/hen/year 35 – 45 
Egg weight, g 35 – 39 
Hatchability of eggs, % 84 – 87 
Source: Ahmed, 1994 (Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute)
Whatever the size of bird, all chickens have an equal number of high-demand portions (such as 
breasts and drumsticks), and a sim ilar proportion of gizzards and  other desirable organ parts 
(see Table 9.2). 
Table 9.2 Organ weights and carcass composition of Ethiopian local chickens at different ages 
72 Marketing 
Slaughter age (months)
Body part weight 
(grams) 
3 4 5 6 
Total body 502 674 892 1006 
Gizzard 19.9 24.1 27.7 30.9 
Heart 2.6 3.1 3.8 4.1 
Intestine 60.9 67.0 77.4 81.8 
Kidneys 4.6 5.4 5.6 6.4 
Liver 15.8 20.0 22.9 25.9 
Lung 4.0 5.1 6.2 6.6 
Pancreas 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.9 
Total organs 109.6 126.7 145.9 158.6 
Body weight % 21.8 18.8 16.3 15.3 
Carcass
Bone 87 113  123 138 
Meat 197 267 331 406 
Skin 36 49 59 68 
Total Carcass 320 429 513 612 
Body weight % 63.7 63.6 57.5 60.8 
Source: Forssido, 1986 
Buying small birds supplies the same number of the desirable parts for a lower price. Together 
with the tenderness of the meat, this explains the heavier trade in young birds, which are also 
bought for replacement stock in depleted flocks. 
SUPPLY MECHANISMS FOR POULTRY MEAT AND EGGS 
Depending on the location of the farm dwelling, birds and eggs are sold from the household to 
traders (dealers or middlemen), direct to consumers, or carried by the farmer to the local market. 
The role of traders in the marketing of poultry prod ucts is an important one. Traders from urban 
areas buy eggs in villages to sell in cities. Where transport is an important consideration (as in 
many parts of Africa), guinea fowl eggs, with their stronger shells, ar e preferred to chicken 
eggs. Prices of eggs are related to supply and demand, to the higher risk of spoilage and lower 
use for hatching in hot and humid seasons, and to the availability of alternative protein foods 
such as fish. There is a tendency to hatch less in the hot season, due to low hatchability and 
diseases of young chickens, and there is also less hatching in the cold season, due to the risk of 
chilling stress to the young chicks. 
 Birds are either brought to the local market once or twice a week for sale to local consumers, 
to other local markets, or to local traders. Chickens are transported to the market in open-weave 
(well ventilated) baskets or wooden crates. They need not be fed on the day of sale, but should 
receive drinking water. If the trip to the market takes eight hours or more, stops should be made 
to supply water to the birds. In hot seasons, it is better to transport birds at night or in the cooler 
early morning. While the price of live birds depends on their size, the price of eggs depends 
more on number. 
 It is often assumed that for poultry and eggs, prod ucers get 60 to 65 percent of the market 
price but this has been found to be false in Bangladesh, where they receive less than this. The 
role of traders or hawkers is very important, as it makes selling from the house possible, but 
these traders take up to 35 percent of the market value, with a consequent lower profit for the 
farmers who are responsible for production. This loss of income has stimulated farmers in many 
places to organize sales through their own marketing groups or formal cooperatives. 
Small-scale poultry production 73
Supply channels 
A study by Adeyanju et al.  (undated, unpublished monograph) of the marketing of poultry 
products in Ondo State (in south-western Nigeria) revealed a large number of transactions and 
participants. The typical flow of the products from the producer to the consumer is shown in 
Figure 9.1. The local channel begins with the producer selling poultry products to retailers who 
serve the needs of local consumers. In most areas, local consumers also buy directly from 
producers. The other marketing channel invo lves wholesalers. They buy poultry products 
directly from producers and sell to retailers inside and outside the State, and are based in urban 
centres where urban-based consumers are located. 
Fig. 9.1  Supply channel for poultry products in Ondo State, Nigeria 
THE FARMER PRODUCER 
ÝÞ
LOCAL MARKET RETAILERS  URBAN WHOLESALERS 
    
LOCAL CONSUMERS   URBAN MARKET RETAILERS 
             
WHOLESALERS    URBAN CONSUMERS 
        
INTERSTATE BOUNDARY 
 
URBAN MARKET RETAILERS IN STATES OUTSIDE ONDO STATE 
 
URBAN CONSUMERS 
Source: Adeyanju et al., (Poultry Farming in Ondo State, undated, unpublished monograph) 
Odi (1990) found th at marketing channels for family poultry often cross international 
boundaries and can generate significant foreign  exchange for the producing countries (see 
Figure 9.2). 
Figure 9.2  Supply channels into Côte d'Ivoire for guinea fowls produced in Burkina Faso 
BURKINA PRODUCER HOUSEHOLDS ($1.33/bird) 
 
74 Marketing 
PRIMARY COLLECTOR (5-10 birds) 
 
SECONDARY COLLECTORS (50-100 birds) 
 
MERCHANTS (250-500 birds) 
 
OUAGADOUGOU (5 000 per trip) 
Railway Station 
<25% mortality 
ABIDJAN, Cote d´Ivoire (3 750 birds) 
Railway Station 
 
Ý ÝÞÞ
IVORIAN CONSUMERS ($3.90/bird) 
Source: Odi, 1990 
Planning 
Forming a marketing plan means identifying where and when birds and eggs will be sold to 
receive the best possible prices. Putting large numbers of birds up for sale in a small community 
may depress the price.  
Even the sale of small numbers of intensively ma naged layers needs advance planning. A flock 
of 20 hens may produce 1 200 eggs in a year, ev en at the low production rate of 35 percent. The 
plans of other farmers must also be considered. If they all expand their flocks and have good 
years, prices will almost inevitably fall. Seasonal considerations enter into market plans as well. 
In India for instance, eggs are thought of as a heat-producing food and are eaten in the cool, 
rainy season. Many factors affect the quality of eggs (see Tables 9.3 to 9.6) and hence the price 
that consumers are willing to pay for them in the market. 
Small-scale poultry production 75
Table 9.3 Egg quality parameters for four breeds of chickens 
Trait Nigerian 
Local 
Isa  
Brown 
Trait Ethiopian 
Local 
White
Leghorn 
(Asuquo et al., 1992) (Forssido, 1986) 
Egg wt., g 40.6 59.2 Egg wt., g 46.0 64.0 
Yolk, % 36.9 26.3 Yolk, % 36.8 34.0 
Albumen, % 52.6 62.8 Albumen, % 49.6 53.0 
Shell thickness, 
mm
0.30 0.35 Shell thickness, 
mm 
0.35 NA 
Yolk index 0.36 0.46 Fertility, % 56.4 46.0 
Albumen index 0.09 0.12 Hatchability % 42.1 24.1 
Haugh unit 79.8 89.9 Haugh unit NA NA 
Table 9.4 Length of lay and egg quality in Nigerian indigenous chicken 
Traits Months of Lay 
 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Egg wt, g 35.8 37.2 36.9 37.1 39.0 38.6 
Yolk wt, g 14.9 14.7 14.5 14.2 14.0 14.2 
% Albumen 47.9 50.8 51.5 52.0 52.0 53.5 
Shell thickness, mm 0.39 0.39 0.36 0.32 0.36 0.35 
Source: Olori and Sonaiya, 1992b
Table 9.5  Quality of eggs of different shell colour of the Nigerian indigenous chicken
Trait Brown Light Brown White 
Egg wt., g 38.9 37.1 37.0 
Yolk wt., g 14.5 14.0 14.8 
Shell wt., g 3.78 3.58 3.51 
Albumen wt., g 20.6 19.6 18.8 
Shell, % 9.77 9.67 9.49 
Yolk, % 37.4 37.8 39.9 
Albumen, % 52.3 52.8 50.8 
Shell thickness, mm 0.37 0.37 0.35 
Surface area, cm
2 52.6 50.9 50.8 
Source: Olori and Sonaiya, 1992a 
EGG QUALITY CONSIDERATIONS 
Quality determines the acceptability of a product to potential purchasers. The quality of eggs 
and the preservation of this quality during storage is a function of their physical structure and 
chemical composition. A basic outline of the most important factors of concern in egg quality is 
presented below. 
Egg composition 
The egg consists of shell, two shell membranes, the white (or albumin) and the yolk. The shell is 
quite porous to air and water vapour but is very resistant to invasion by micro-organisms as long 
as it is clean and dry. A thin outer covering on the shell called the “bloom” or “cuticle” (which 
is unfortunately easily removed by washing), assists this process. After the egg is laid, its 
contents shrink, both from cooling and water evaporation. Air is drawn in (a long with anything 
76 Marketing 
else on the shell, such as bacteria or fungi) through the pores in the shell to replace this loss. A 
gap opens up between the two membranes because the outer one is attached to the shell and the 
inner one is attached to the egg white. This gap is known as the “air cell” and is usually found at 
the large blunt end of the egg. The egg white ta kes the form of a “thick” albumin sack enclosing 
the yolk, with a more fluid “thin” albumin between this sack and the yolk to the inside, and 
again between the sack and the shell to the outside. These layers provide a barrier to prevent the 
yolk touching the shell and to provide food for the embryo. Egg white has specific antibiotic 
effects, which further protect the yolk. Egg white also contains two fibrou s cords (the chalaza), 
which are attached to the yolk and to either end of the egg, which help hold the yolk in the 
centre and assist in preventing the yolk from touching the shell. 
 The weight of an egg laid by a local village breed of hen is about 35 g. Commercial hybrids 
lay eggs of about 58 g weight. The shell comprises approximately 11 percent of the weight of an 
egg, the remainder being the edible portion. By weight of edible portion, the yolk is 36 percent 
and the white is 64 percent. 
Shell quality 
Eggs of unusual shape are more likely to be  damaged during the marketing process, and 
consumers do not like them. Small thin cracks in the shell, which do not leak, are called 
“checks”. These are usually detected by candling. “Checked” eggs should be sold for immediate 
consumption, as their storage life is limited. The household usually consumes eggs with leaking 
cracks, where the eggshell membranes are broken as well as the shell. Brittle, thin-shelled eggs 
(shells less than 0.35 mm thick) are also unsuitable for transport to market. Dirty eggs must be 
cleaned by dry or wet methods, and thus have a higher marketing risk because of the removal of 
the cuticle. 
 Shell colour is not a guide to egg quality, but there is usually a consumer bias to either white 
or brown, which must be considered in marketing. 
Egg yolk and egg white quality 
Consumers prefer the odour and flavour of normal fresh eggs. The yolk should be round, firm 
and yellow in colour. Local yolk colour preferences may vary and can be easily adjusted by 
raising or lowering the amount of green leaf material included in the poultry ration or 
supplement. Egg white normally has a slightly yellow-green tinge and the thick white is slightly 
cloudy. 
 Consumers are usually critical of blood or meat spots, which can vary in colour from red to 
grey, and in size from small specks up to one square centimetre. Blood spots are caused by 
slight bleeding at the time of release of the ovule (yolk) from the ovary of the hen. They may be 
found in the white or adhering to the yolk. 
Deterioration
The interior quality of eggs deteriorates after laying at a rate depending on time and conditions 
of storage, such as temperature, relative humidity (RH), and the presence of strong smelling 
substances or other food items in the storage place. Eggs stored at 27 to 29 oC for 7 to 10 days 
will show deterioration changes similar to the same eggs stored at minus 1 oC and 85 percent 
RH for several months. The changes are due to water loss, carbon dioxide (CO 2) and the 
absorption of volatile odours from the environment. 
Moisture loss 
Since an egg contains about 74 percent water and the shell is porous, eggs readily lose moisture. 
A weight loss of 2 to 3 percent is common in marketing and is seldom noticed by the consumer. 
When losses exceed this level, the air cell is noticeably enlarged by shrinkage in the contents of 
the egg. This loss is reduced if the storage humidity  is high and the temperature is reduced. 
Coating the eggs with oil and other substances can also reduce the loss. The ideal conditions for 
egg storage are about minus 1 oC and between 80 to 85 percent RH. At storage temperatures of 
10 oC and above, the optimum RH is 80 percent. There is a risk of mould spoilage when the RH 
Small-scale poultry production 77
is too high. Paper pulp egg trays or other packing materials that readily absorb moisture will 
accelerate moisture losses from eggs. A temperature as low as 10 °C is unlikely to be practical 
in rural areas of many developing countries. Temperatures between 10 and 15 °C are more 
practical, but even then, care should be taken when moving the eggs from cool storage into the 
outside air with its higher temperature, which often causes condensation to form on the shell, 
with consequent risks of mould and “rot” growth. 
Microbiological spoilage 
The contents of the egg are usually sterile when the egg is laid. The main cause of 
contamination is the washing of eggs. Wetting the shell allows micro-organisms on the shell to 
penetrate and multiply inside. Common indications are green, black and red “rots”, mustiness 
and sourness. The bacteria causing these effects cannot penetrate the shell if it is kept dry. If 
eggs do become wet through condensation, for example after removal from a cool store into a 
warmer room, bacteria may then be able to penetrate the shell. 
Tainting
Eggs, especially yolks, are easily tainted by strong odours, from such sources as disinfectants, 
soaps, diesel, kerosene, petrol, paint, varnish and wood preservatives. Other foods, such as 
onions and citrus products, can taint eggs after only a few days of exposure. 
EGG QUALITY CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE 
Maintenance of egg quality is a major problem for those involved in egg marketing. The 
importance of using good packing, storage and transport methods to preserve quality is 
addressed in other sections below. 
 Eggs soiled by droppings or the contents of leaking or broken eggs spoil faster than clean 
eggs. Only good quality eggs should be sent to the market. The simplest way of sorting is to 
divide the eggs into three categories: cracked, dirty and clean. The cracked eggs should be eaten 
or sold locally for immediate consumption. The dirty ones  should be cleaned and sold locally 
for consumption within a few days, while the clean eggs can be sent to the major marketing 
outlet. In some areas, eggs of certain colour or sizes are preferred, and the eggs should be sorted 
for these qualities. 
Production factors affecting egg quality 
The main production factors affecting egg quality are: 
x breed and age of the flock; 
x type of feed; 
x incidence of disease; 
x management control of the laying flock; and 
x management control of the handling of eggs. 
Breed and age of the laying flock 
The effect of breed on the egg is inherent in many aspects, including the colour, thickness and 
texture of the shell, the incidence of blo od spots, and the amount of thick albumin. While 
commercial breeders pay constant attention to these factors, there is little that farmers can do to 
control them. 
 After the first season of egg production, hens produce eggs of poorer shell quality and poorer 
egg white thickness, even though the eggs are larger in size. The rate of egg production is also 
lower. For these reasons as well as the high meat value of the carcass of the older hen in most 
developing countries, it is advisable to replace the hens after 12 to 18 months of lay. 
Type of feed 
A balanced diet supplied to intensively housed chickens  must supply sufficient nutrients to 
enable the hen to produce an egg with a good shell thickness and good egg yolk colour. A high 
78 Marketing 
level of yellow maize, leaf or grass meal will ensure a good yolk colour. Calcium carbonate in 
some form (limestone or shell) must be supplied (for more detail, see Chapter 3 on Feed 
Resources and Chapter 4 on General Management). This is either mixed in the ration or fed as a 
separate supplement on a free-choice basis. It is often quite practicable to have a separate 
container in a pen with shell or limestone inside. 
 Fish meal with a high fish oil content fed in the di et can give fishy flavours to eggs produced 
by hens on those diets. 
Incidence of disease 
The diseases Infectious Bronchitis (IB) and Newcastle Disease both affect egg quality. They 
cause the hens to lay eggs with misshapen shells and poor quality thick white. IB induces 
groove-like marks along the long axis of the eggshell. 
Management control over the laying flock 
In many developing co untries, there is a belief that a rooster is necessary to stimulate hens to 
lay. This is not true. The presence of an active male causes the eggs to be laid as fertile eggs 
(containing an embryo chick), and this reduces the storage stability of the egg. Even after the 
male is removed, all eggs laid are fertile for up to six weeks because sperm is stored and 
released from specialised cavities in the hen’s oviduct. If fertile eggs are in demand, then cocks 
should be placed with the hens. Non-fertilized eggs have a much longer shelf life than fertilized 
eggs and are more suitable for the market. 
 Dirty eggs can be reduced in number. For hens in deep litter systems, the nest box litter must 
be clean and replaced regularly. Frequent collection of eggs under any housing management 
system, and at least four times a day in the hot humid tropics, will reduce the incidence of dirty 
eggs. 
Management control over egg handling 
Temperature control 
The most effective way to preserve egg quality is to store eggs between 10 and 15 oC during all 
handling, transport and marketing phases. Insulated contain ers and/or vehicles can maintain 
cool temperatures during long-distance transport. Even an outer layer of straw in a basket will 
help. In hot weather, and where there is no cool  storage system, eggs should be transported to 
market at least every third day. Eggs should neve r be left standing in the sun or in a very hot 
room. Air conditioning or even an electric fan is advised whenever practicable. However, as air 
conditioning has the negative effect of drying out the egg contents as well as the advantageous 
effect of cooling, wet sacks should be placed as curtains in the cool store to alleviate this 
dehydrating effect. If fans or air conditioning are not available, then shaded well-ventilated 
rooms or underground cellars should be used. 
Treatment of dirty eggs 
An egg’s shell has a natural protective coating (cuticle) that resists the entrance of bacteria and 
retains moisture inside. Washing eggs with water removes this protection, and thus washed eggs 
should be eaten as soon as possible. Whether eggs are wet- or dry- cleaned, they should be sold 
separately from naturally clean eggs, as their storage life is shorter. The cuticle from the shell is 
a protein-fat substance, and the lack of a cuticle can therefore be detected with a simple 
ultraviolet (UV) lamp. Washed eggs (without a cuticle) are red in colour under UV-light, while 
a blue colour indicates that the cuticle is still present. 
Small-scale poultry production 79
Dry cleaning 
Even with good flock management, some eggs will get dirty. The risks of allowing water to 
touch the shell have already been mentioned. Dry cleaning systems are preferred. Rubbing 
lightly with fine sandpaper or a rough cloth is better than wet cleaning. Cloth-backed sandpaper 
or emery paper can be wrapped around a block of foam rubber for dry cleaning by hand. Steel 
wool and nylon dishwashing or ba throom scrubbing aids are also quite suitable. Care should be 
taken not to remove too much of the protective cuticle layer which covers the shell. Only the 
dirty patches should be cleaned. There are also motor-driven dry-cleaners commercially 
available. The simplest model consists of a spinning wheel of foam rubber. A mixture of glue 
and sand is applied periodically to the foam wheel. The operator holds the egg against the 
spinning foam wheel to clean it. 
Wet cleaning 
Washing of eggs is only suggested under very well-controlled conditions. The concern is to 
ensure that the washing water temperature (38 to 43 
oC) is never below that of the egg. This 
avoids the wash water being sucked into the egg through the shell pores by the action of the egg 
contents shrinking (as happens if the egg is in contact with cooler water). In addition, the 
washing machine must be able to monitor the detergent/sanitizer/disinfectant/antiseptic levels in 
the water to ensure that they are optimal. Only special types of non-tainting chemicals can be 
used. The water itself must be changed frequently. After washing, the shell should be 
pasteurised by dipping the eggs in water at 82 
oC for a few seconds, then dried quickly with 
warm air before packing.  The eggs must also be clearly labelled as “washed”. Washing done in 
this way is complex and expe nsive, and is therefore only justified in large operations, although 
even then it involves risks. 
EGG QUALITY GRADING 
Interior quality 
Candling
Opening the egg by breaking it is the only accurate way to fully check the interior quality. This 
can only be done on a limited sample basis. “Candling” can show some aspects of internal 
quality without breaking the shell. It consists of inspecting the egg in a beam of light strong 
enough to penetrate the shell and illuminate the contents. Various types of lamps can be used 
but the essential features are similar. An incandescent-type bulb of 25 to 50 watts is enclosed in 
a casing with light exiting through a round hole about 3 cm in diameter against which the egg is 
held and turned. The casing usually has another hole to provide light for the operator to see the 
egg container if th e room is very dark. By rotating  the hand-held egg close to the hole in the 
candler, the yolk and egg white quality can be estimated by their movement. Experienced 
operators can candle 24 eggs per minute. The main points to observe are summarised in the 
following paragraphs. 
White 
Egg white (albumin) characteristics showing good egg quality are thick albumin fullness and 
albumin transparency. When the thick albumin sack is strong and healthy, it is full and confines 
the yolk within the various layers of egg white. As the th ick albumin sack deteriorates, its 
contents leak into the thin albumin cavity. The yolk then moves more freely, increasing the risk 
that it might touch the shell and be contaminated by micro-or ganisms from outside the shell. A 
healthy albumin is also transparent. It can become discoloured or cloudy due to rot or 
overexposure to hot water (partial coagulation) in washing. 
80 Marketing 
Yolk
Yolk characteristics showing good egg quality are confinement within the thick albumin, a 
small spherical shape, orange-yellow colour and the  absence of spots. As described in the above 
paragraph, yolk confinement within the albumin protects the yolk from outside contaminants. A 
small spherical shape indicates a strong yolk membrane. When the egg is exposed to high 
temperatures and dehydration, the yolk deteriorates and grows larger and flatter. Consumers 
prefer yolks of orange-yellow colour without s pots. Spots on the yolk can indicate: embryo 
development (reddish colour); blood from the he n’s ovary and “meat” bits from the oviduct 
released during egg formation (red and brown, respectively); moulds (grey or black); or 
bacterial rots (blue, violet, green or red). Although consumers prefer yolks with no spots, the 
only spots that pose any health risk are mould and rot spots. 
Air cell 
Air cell characteristics showing good egg quality are small size, shallow depth and fixed 
position at the blunt end of the egg. Small size and shallow depth indicate very little loss of 
moisture from the egg contents, which in turn indicates freshness (or that the eggs have been 
stored under good conditions). A fixed position at the blunt end of the egg indicates that the 
membranes surrounding the air cell have not been damaged (for example, by rough handling). 
 There is usually a correlation between the depth of the air cell and other quality aspects. 
However an egg stored at high temperature a nd high humidity may show a good air cell depth 
(as the high humidity maintains the egg moisture) but it may have deteriorated otherwise (as a 
result of the high temperature). 
 Air cells can be deflated completely or become unfixed and mobile within the egg. The air 
cell can become filled with albumin if part of the inner shell membrane is broken. If the 
membrane is merely weakened, the air cell may move freely around the egg. These mobile air 
cells are often caused by transporting eggs on rough roads or by the egg being stored small end 
upwards. The egg could be otherwise quite fresh. 
Shell quality 
Before candling, eggshell quality is assessed, and eggs that are dirty, cracked, thin, rough or 
misshapen are processed accordingly (procedures regarding shell quality are addressed 
extensively in the above section on production factors affecting egg quality). 
EGG SALE OPTIONS: GRADED SIZE OR TOTAL PACKAGE WEIGHT 
Eggs can be sold by graded size or by total package weight. Selling by graded size involves 
weighing each egg individu ally and grading the eggs within certain weight ranges (commonly 
Small, Medium and Large). They are then packed in cartons of 10 or 12 eggs, and sold 
according to a price per graded size. Selling by total package weight involves packing the eggs 
without size grading, and selling the package according to a price per kilogram (like almost all 
other food products). 
 Consumers in the more developed countries ar e accustomed to buying eggs graded by size 
and boxed into cartons. Grading eggs by size requires complex machinery for grading and 
packaging, as well as monitoring and testing of all grading machines, and sample monitoring of 
the various grades at retail outlets. 
 In developing countries without the capital or administrative capacity to undertake such 
extensive monitoring tasks, the better option is to sell eggs by total package weight. If a market 
weighing scale is used to weigh foods such as rice or maize, then it can also be used to weigh 
eggs so that they can be sold by package weight. Selling eggs by package weight also simplifies 
the situation where standardization of containers and grades has not yet been developed. It also 
makes price comparisons between different types of food items much easier for the consumer. 
 Eggs in most developing countries are sold by quantity rather than by weight, which 
penalizes the producer of larger eggs. As local br eeds of hens usually lay uniformly small eggs, 
this is not a significant problem. However, as the  market grows and a demand develops for 
Small-scale poultry production 81
different sized eggs based on the availability of commercial hybrids (laying larger eggs) in peri-
urban areas, the decision to sell eggs by graded size or by total package weight must be faced. 
EGG TRANSPORT 
The four concerns regarding egg transport are: 
x Protection against mechanical damage,  which can be achieved by avoiding excessive 
shaking, especially where roads are bad, and by using spring suspensions on bicycle 
carriers. 
x Protection against poor egg handling , which can be achieved by providing convenient 
loading levels to make lifting easier. 
x Protection against tainting odours.
x Protection against exposure to high temperatures in transport. 
Egg packing methods 
Eggs can be packed with a padding of rice husk s, wheat chaff or chopped straw in firm-walled 
baskets or crates. This greatly reduces the risk of shell damage in transport. In Iran, long flat 
boxes, each containing about 1,000 eggs cushioned in chopped straw, are commonly used for 
the transport of eggs to the capital from a dista nce of up to 1 000 km. The boxes are transported 
in trucks over rough roads, but breakages seldom exceed five percent. The main difficulty with 
such systems is in standardizing the number of eggs per container. Consignors and receivers 
will otherwise spend much time counting eggs and repacking to ensure that the correct number 
has been received for payment. 
 The standard type of transport egg packing  container is the 30-egg tray, which is made of 
paper pulp holding six rows of five eggs each. The trays are stackable either when full or empty. 
A standard box of 360 eggs (30 dozen) is made up of two stacks, each comprised of six trays. 
Washable plastic reusable trays are also available. Cases are usually made of wood. Half-cases 
to hold 180 eggs (15 dozen) are also common and are usually made of corrugated cardboard. 
Quality preservation during transport 
Permissible temperature ranges depend on the duration of transport time. In Europe, the 
temperature recommendation for two to three day transport in refrigerated vehicles is between -
1 oC to 3 oC.  In developing countries, however, ref rigerated vehicles are not widely available. 
Even when available, precautions are needed to avoid moisture condensation on eggs removed 
from the cool container to the warm moist air of the retailing environment. 
 Fans blowing air towards the eggs across a container of salt and ice is a cooling system that 
has been used in Pakistan for egg transport by rail for the 1 600 km trip from Peshawar to 
Karachi, where outside summer temperatures can range from 38 °C to 47 °C. 
Refrigerated transport is expensive. In estimating the costs of establishing such a system, the 
volume of trade for refrigerated goods is an important consideration. The capital cost may be 
spread over five years to prepare the costing. Transport of other taint-compatible produce with 
the eggs should be considered; as should the prospect of back -loading with other goods, which 
may not necessarily require refrigeration. 
 Public transport such as rail or bus is the most common means of transport in developing 
countries. Awareness of the special needs for egg transport as addressed above will assist the 
operator in preserving the quality of the eggs no matter what the type of transport. 
EGG STORAGE 
All egg storage systems must meet the following requirements: 
x Water loss by evaporation to be minimized. 
x Mould and bacteria growth to be minimized. 
82 Marketing 
x Interior quality to be maintained (indicated by a good proportion of a thick white, a firm, 
rounded yolk and good flavour in both). 
The first two requirements can be met (for sto rage periods of three to five months) by: coating 
eggs with oil or waterglass (sodium  silicate); immersing eggs in limewater (calcium hydroxide 
solution); or putting eggs in dry storage (using such materials as bran, peat dust, soda lime, salt 
and wood ash). However, all three of the abov e requirements can only be met by refrigeration, 
which is the best storage method, if available. 
 Following below are descriptions of some of the traditional egg storage methods used in the 
absence of refrigeration. The first two systems rely on evaporative cooling, which is only 
effective in the hot dry tropics. The hot humid tropics do not allow sufficient evaporation to 
occur, and thus there is much less of a cooling effect. Where none of these storage systems can 
be used, there is no way to slow the inevitable drop in egg quality, and the eggs should therefore 
be transported to the consumer as quickly as possible. 
Clay pot 
Eggs are placed in a clay pot buried in the ground up to its neck, in a shaded area. The pot is 
covered tightly so that no water gets into the pot. The ground around the pot is watered, but 
without leaving puddles of water. Straw or a mat is placed in the pot to cushion th e eggs and to 
keep them above any water that seeps into the container. The eggs are put in the pot as soon as 
they are collected, and covered with a cloth and damp straw. Due to the evaporative cooling 
effect, the inside of the pot is often five to six Celsius degrees cooler than the outside air 
temperature. A variation of this method, used in the Sudan, is to bury an earthenware pot in the 
ground to half its height. A 7 cm layer of mixed sa nd and clay is packed around the pot up to its 
neck, and kept wet by sprinkling water on it. The inside of the pot is lined with grass. The eggs 
inside are covered with a thin cloth to allow air circulation. Evaporative cooling in Sudan’s hot 
dry climate often reduces the egg temperature to up to eight-Cel sius degrees below that of the 
air outside. Eggs are turned daily to prevent the yolks touching the shell, which would 
accelerate the decaying process. 
Wet sack cooler 
This is another method utilising the evaporative cooling principle. The sack material is kept wet 
by having a tray of water above the hanging sack , into which the neck-edge of the sack material 
is dipped, keeping the sack wet. A slightly more sophisticated system uses perforated pipes 
connected to a water tank. To prevent mould formation, the sacking is pre-soaked in a solution 
of copper sulphate (CuSO
4), using 60 g of crystals in four litres of water. 
Oil coating 
A thin film of oil on an eggshell fills its pores and reduces evaporation and thus spoilage of the 
egg contents. Using a wire basket, the eggs are dipped into slightly heated oil, about 11 qC
warmer than the eggs. Special odourless, colourless, low viscosity mineral oils can be used. If 
these are not available, then any light mineral oil or almost any cooking oil that doesn’t easily 
turn rancid serves the purpose. To reuse the oil, it is cleaned through a filter and heated to 116 
qC to sterilize it. Four litres of oil coats about 7,000 eggs. Oiled eggs last for at least three weeks 
(longer if kept at 10 RC, or less at temperatures above 21 oC). For high temperature storage, eggs 
should be oiled four to six hours after laying. 
Waterglass paste 
Waterglass is a paste or ointment of sodium silicate in water. It is rubbed onto the hands and 
then the egg is rolled between the two waterglass-coated hands to transfer a waterproof coating 
of waterglass paste to the eggshell. 
Small-scale poultry production 83
Waterglass solution 
For 100 eggs, a 25-litre pot or jar is used, and 5.3 litres of previously boiled (and then cooled) 
water are mixed with 0.5 litres of waterglass. The eggs are placed in the pot and covered with 
the waterglass solution. The pot is covered and kept in a cool, shaded place. The eggs keep for 
one to six months. 
Limewater solution 
Limewater is a solution of calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH) 2], a mild alkali. The main ingredient is 
burnt lime (also known as quicklime). The chemical name of this is calcium oxide (CaO). It is 
also known as choon in Bangladesh, and is a common ingredient of the betel nut mixture 
chewed by people in many tropical countries. Calcium oxide is made by burning limestone 
(CaCO3) in a hot fire. Carbon dioxide (CO 2) is driven off from the limestone, leaving CaO 
behind as a white powder. Dissolving this  calcium oxide in water makes limewater. The 
resultant solution of calcium hydroxide  is only partly soluble , and the insoluble portion will 
settle to the bottom of the container. 
 Six litres of limewater is made by stirring 2.3 kg of calcium oxide into six litres of boiled 
(then cooled) water. It is allowed to stand overnight so that the insoluble portion settles. The 
eggs and the clear part of the limewater solution are placed in a pot, covered and kept cool. The 
eggs last more than a month. In the years prior to 1970, eggs were commonly transported from 
Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) to Pakistan (formerly West Pakistan) on a train journey of 
about a month, in high temperatures. The eggs  were stored in earthenware jars containing 
limewater and maintained their quality well. 
Hot water immersion 
Immersion in hot water for carefully controlled lengths of time has a pasteurizing effect, which 
kills the embryo in fertile eggs, destroys some of the bacteria on the shell and stabilizes the 
quality of the egg white. The difficulty is to achieve this without coagulating some of the egg 
white. Equivalent effects are achieved with any of the following temperature-time 
combinations:  
          3 5  m i n u t e s  a t   4 9  oC
      1 5      5 4  oC
      1 0      5 9  oC
        5      6 0  oC
This method requires special equipment and supervision. 
Salt and wet clay or ashes 
Eggs are coated in a mixture of salt and wet clay or ashes which allows them to keep for one 
month. This method has been practised for centuries in China. 
Cooked rice and salt 
Eggs are covered with a mixture of cooked  rice and salt, which allows them to keep for six 
months. This method has been practised for centuries in China. 
Lime, salt, wood ashes and tea 
Eggs are covered with a layer of lime, salt and wood ashes mixed with a tea infusion, which 
allows them to keep for several years. This method has been practised for centuries in China. 
Small-scale poultry production 85
Chapter 10 
Research and Development for Family Poultry
Research and development in the field of Family Poultry (FP) must first examine the social, 
cultural and technical constraints faced by this secto r, and then observe how these have been 
addressed in past effo rts and whether the lesso ns are being applied in currently ongoing efforts. 
While holding this perspective, the need for further research, training and extension must then 
be assessed in the light of a clear understanding of what the overall development objectives are, 
and what place FP has in achieving them. Having provided background in the preceding nine 
chapters, this final chapter takes the reader through these concluding stages. 
SOCIO-CULTURAL CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPMENT 
A sociological appraisal is essential in determining strategies for development. Technical and 
economic appraisals are also necessary, but are insuf ficient on their own. Socio-cultural factors 
contribute to the wide variety of response of livestock keepers even under identical economic 
conditions. Many socio-cultural factors affect livestock production. For example, some 
communities ban ducks, as they are presumed dirty and destructive to drinking water supplies. 
Some communities regard pigeons as a sign of peace and concord. In such communities, the 
presence of pigeons is regarded as a good omen, and their departure would presage disaster. In 
other communities, pigeons are regarded as an evil omen, since they are used by native doctors 
in sinister rituals. 
 Another socio-cultural constraint to poultry de velopment is the value placed upon poultry for 
use at ceremonies and festivals or even as a sour ce of income in times of need but not as a 
source of daily food nor as a regular source of income. Some regard chickens as their pets or 
part of the family, thus it is only the arrival of an important unexpected visitor that could allow 
their use as food, although they can be sold without regret and the money utilised. 
 Another major constraint to poultry production  is the high value placed upon crop 
production rather than livestock production. This affects the willingness to put much time, 
expense and effort into livestock production. Theft is also a great constraint. Villagers who have 
lost all their poultry to theft may be reluctant to face the expense of starting again. 
 Another constraint is the social norm that determines ownership of livestock. Typically, 
where crop farming is the men’s main activity, keeping livestock is perceived as a peripheral 
activity relegated to women and children. However, wh en the number of liv estock increases, 
men usually take over the activity. 
 It should not be assumed that socio-cultu ral factors can be changed. However, by 
incorporating socio-cultural factors into development stra tegies, the programmes and 
technologies may encounter less resistance. Development programmes, which combine local 
knowledge with western science, yield strategie s which are culturally more acceptable. Socio-
cultural factors are thus not seen as a problem, but rather as a factor to be considered or used in 
finding a solution (Olawoye and di Domenico, 1990). 
TECHNICAL CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPMENT 
The most common FP flock size of between 5 to 20 birds seems to be the limit that can be kept 
by a family without special inputs in terms of feeding, housing and labour. These small flocks 
scavenge sufficient feed in the su rroundings of the homestead to survive and to reproduce. Any 
significant increase in flock size often leads to malnutrition if no feed supplement is provided. 
In addition, larger flock sizes must forage at greater distances, which may involve damage to 
neighbours’ vegetable gardens. Any move to fenc e in or enclose the poultry then involves the 
need to provide a balanced ration. Larger flock sizes can easily arise once mortality is reduced 
through vaccination and improved hygiene. Floc k size can rapidly increase to the point where 
86 Research and Development for family poultry 
the feed requirement exceeds the available Scavengable Feed Resource Base (SFRB) in the area 
around the dwelling (For more detail on the SFRB concept, see Chapter 3 “Feed Resources”). 
At this stage, either supplementary feeding or  a semi-intensive system of management is 
required. If balanced feed, day-old hybrid chick and vaccine input supplies (and markets) are 
available and well organized, and then intens ive poultry management systems may be a viable 
option. There have been many attempts to take short cuts to development and to start 
immediately with the semi-intensive system. 
FAO consultation 1987 
A wide range of approaches to improve FP production has been tried. An FAO Expert 
Consultation on Rural Poultry Development in Asia was held in Ba ngladesh in March 1987, to 
review these approaches in order to identify the reasons for success or failure. A major issue 
during the workshop was to clearly define the different system s of rural poultry production. 
There was confusion in terminology between th e low-technology scavenging systems of 
Bangladesh, Myanmar and Bhutan, and the sm all semi-intensive or intensive production 
systems (a few hundred birds) kept in India, Malaysia and Indonesia. 
Table 10.1  The effect of rural poultry improvement on production, reprod uction and off-take 
per hen/year 
Production system Nº of  
eggs/hen/year 
Nº of year-
old 
chickens 
Nº of eggs for 
consumption and 
sale
Traditional 
Step 0: Scavenging: 
no regular water or feed, poor night 
shelter
20 – 30 2 - 3 0 
Improved Traditional 
Step 1: offered water and supplementary 
feed, improved shelter, care in first 
weeks, ND vaccination 
40 – 60 4 - 8 10 - 20 
Step 2: as in step 1 plus further feeding, 
watering, housing; treatment for 
parasites, additional vaccinations 
100 10 - 12 30 - 50 
Step 3: (semi-intensive) as in step 2 
with improved breeds and complete 
diets 
160 – 180 25 - 30 50 - 60 
Source: Bessei, 1987 
These differences motivated the FAO consultation facilitator (Bessei, 1987) to classify the 
various poultry production systems in Asia (Table 10.1, above). The table shows the logical 
evolution from Step 0 to Step 3, and the Consultation agreed that many development projects 
had failed because they did not recognise th e constraints present at the different steps of 
development. The constraints themselves (shown in Table 10.2) show the need for awareness 
raising in the farmers to recognise the needs of their poultry for regular waterin g and feeding, 
cleaning of the poultry night house and care of the young chicks. The Consultation 
recommended that the first critical step for rural poultry development is the encouragement and 
support of farmers to change their traditional system. Taking into consideration the chronic 
shortages of personnel an d transport affecting extension se rvices in the developing countries, 
the Consultation emphasized the importance of selecting pilot farms to serve as models as they 
can have a multiplier effect on the neighbouring farms and villages. 
 Perhaps because of the variety of understandings of rural poultry development, many of the 
methods suggested seem more suited to the development of small units of intensive poultry 
production. The methods reflect the procedures required for transfer of new technology or total 
Small-scale poultry production 87
replacement of existing practices. For instance, incentives were required to encourage farmers to 
participate in the programmes, perhaps indicating that the programmes were not consistent with 
the priorities of the farmers. Selection of farmers was also identified as a major factor in 
determining the success or failure of a development programme. Incentives can often lead to the 
selection of farmers not genuinely interested in poultry production. To ensure the selection of 
authentic candidates, the following procedure was recommended: 
x The extension service should select farmers already known to be particularly interested 
in poultry production. 
x Incentives should never be given in cash. 
x Incentives should always be associated with certain commitments by the farmers (for 
example, equipment for poultry houses s hould be provided only if the farmer has 
constructed the poultry shed at his own cost). 
x Supplies of inputs such as day-old chicks, fertile eggs, feed and vaccines should be made 
at cost price. 
The pilot farm method risks failure if a large amount of foreign input (such as equipment and 
construction materials) is needed to establish it because neighbouring farms can become 
discouraged by the fact that they are unable to procure the same equipment. 
Table 10.2 Technical constraints and training requirements for family poultry development 
Constraint Training Measures required 
Disease risk Advice on sanitation and health; training vaccinators. 
Predators Advice on predator control. 
Housing Advice on improved poultry housing. 
Feed and water Advice on locally available feed ingredients and their combinations; 
making of feeders and drinkers; regular provision of feed and water. 
Genetic potential Introduction of improved indigenous (and if necessary, exotic) breeds and 
advice on special management. 
Marketing Advice on egg handling and storage, and training of farmers in group 
management and marketing. 
Source: Bessei, 1987 
In order to be effective in the process of tec hnology and information transfer, pilot farms should 
be charged with special duties, which bring them obligatorily in contact with the other poultry 
keepers. Pilot poultry farmers have been successfully trained in Bangladesh and Burkina Faso to 
vaccinate chickens and guinea fowls, respectively. Pilot farmers can also be used to provide 
improved lines or to raise pullets for distribution so that a number of farms in the surrounding 
area will be regularly served with inputs and information. 
 Attempts to by-pass the phas es as described by Bessei (1987) usually fail, and it appears that 
the transitory phases (especially Steps 1 and 2 as described in Table 10.1) are important if the 
development is starting from the traditional scavenging system. It has been noted that even in 
successful poultry development programmes, the supply of feed and veterinary products often 
lags behind the increase in flock size, especially if it is organized by the government extension 
service. The use of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and private entrepreneurs is a 
better alternative. 
INFPD and the 1998 FAO e-conference 
The International Network for Family Poultry Development (INFPD) started as the African 
Network for Rural Poultry Development (ANRPD), and was established during an international 
workshop on rural poultry development held in No vember 1989 in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. The name 
was changed to INFPD at a meeting that took place in M’Bour, Senegal, in December 1997 
(Sonaiya, 2000). INFPD is mainly an information exchange network. One of its objectives is to 
88 Research and Development for family poultry 
encourage higher standards of research and de velopment that can sustainably increase the 
productivity of the FP subsector. This is achieved through providing advice and collecting data 
and detailed information about FP production systems. Information is disseminated through a 
trilingual (English, French an d Spanish) newsletter, produced twice yearly and distributed 
electronically (with a printed version for members without email facilities) with the assistance 
of FAO. 
 In December 1998, FAO held the first INFPD/FAO electronic conference on FP, which 
proved so popular and interactive that it was extended until July 1999. The introductory paper 
to this conference addressed the issue of research and development options for FP (Sonaiya e.
al., 1999). The layout of this important introductory paper was: 
x Research options for family poultry development. 
x Prospects for development. 
x Development approaches. 
x Breeding and reproduction (evaluation and selection of indigenous breeds). 
x Evaluation and adaptation of imported breeds to hot climates. 
x Feed research and development. 
x Health management. 
x Entrepreneur development. 
x Information management. 
All papers, comments and discussions are available on the FAO/INFPD website. The constraints 
and issues facing FP that were recognized by the e-conference are: 
Disease
Newcastle disease (ND) constitutes the most serious epizootic poultry disease in the world, 
particularly in developing countries. No progress has been made in controlling ND in free-
ranging village flocks, which represent more than 80 percent of the total poultry population. 
Several recent surveys in Africa showed high rates of seropositivity in the absence of 
vaccination. In developing countries, ND occurs every year and kills an average of 70 to 80 
percent of the unvaccinated village hens (Branckaert et al., 2000). It is very difficult to organize 
vaccination campaigns covering free-range birds. The main constraints are: 
x the difficulty of gro uping together an ade quately large number of birds in order to obtain 
an efficient vaccination rate; 
x the possibility of disease cross-contamination arising from birds of various ages being 
raised together; and
x the difficulty of maintaining an efficient cold chain for proper vaccine quality 
preservation. 
Diseases make poultry production a risky venture . FP producers using the free-range extensive 
system acknowledge this risk, and reduce its impact on the household economy by having small 
flocks. ND is a major disease problem for all FP producers wherever the disease exists. 
Vaccination of the flock against ND is very important and provides a basis for further 
development.  
 It is worth repeating that the reluctance of farmers to invest in poultry production is not due 
to a lack of resources but to the risk of disease outbreaks and mortality. Killer diseases like ND 
regularly decimate village flocks. In traditional farming systems, farmers often live close to the 
survival limit, so they naturally avoid risks. Minimizing risk ranks higher than increasing 
output. A key component of FP development is the control of the most  important diseases. 
Regular vaccination is a prerequisite for any improvement in FP production. 
 Although the control of ND is the key constrai nt, there are other disease constraints, which 
rise in importance as soon as higher-ranking constraints are eliminated. Many poultry 
development projects have failed because only one constraint was tackled or, when more than 
Small-scale poultry production 89
one constraint was considered, the importance of other problems was poorly understood. Many 
projects concentrated either on disease control or on genetic improvement. There is no doubt 
that vaccination reduces mortality, but in one particular project, in certain periods, mortality due 
to predation was as high as 70 percent and the ef fect of vaccination wa s further negated by a 
secondary constraint of poor housing (Bourzat an d Saunders, 1987). Generally, the costs of an 
isolated vaccination campaign cannot be justified unless actions to improve housing and feeding 
are also taken. 
Predators
Predators such as snakes, rats, dogs, cats, foxes, raco ons and birds of prey represent the main 
causes of predator losses, especially in young birds. Human beings can also represent another 
important predator for adult birds. Proper she lter should be cons tructed using locally available 
materials, and predators should be trapped, hu nted or repelled by specific plants (Branckaert e.
al., 2000). For example, in Nigeria, sliced garlic ( Allium sativum ) is placed around poultry 
houses to repel snakes. 
 Analysis of mortality in FP flocks in Thailand (Thitisak, 1992) showed that the first four 
months of life are critical for the growing chicks. The mortality of chicks during this period 
often rose to 60 percent (Matthewman, 1977) even in flocks vaccinated for ND. In Africa, while 
various other diseases such as Salmonellosis or co ccidiosis affected the chicks during the first 
two months of age (Chabeuf, 1990), the most important cause of mortality between two and 
four months of age was predation, by dogs, ca ts, hawks and snakes, which caused up to 70 
percent mortality (Bourzat and Saunders, 1987). Overnight housing is an important way to 
reduce this loss, and can utilize locally available materials of reasonable cost. 
Feeding
Feed is also an input of major concern and the supply of adequate feed supplement is critical. 
The nutrient intake of scavenging birds varies fr om place to place according to the seasons, the 
crops grown and the natural vegetation available. In field experiments, feed supplements, 
including household waste (cooked potatoes, yams or cassava tubers), and oilseed cakes, have a 
positive effect on egg production and body weight of scavenging birds. 
 Careful attention should be given to ensuring adequate feed resources. Feed represents 60 to 
80 percent of the input cost in the intensive commercial poultry sector. In Low Income, Food-
Deficient Countries (LIFDCs), a surplus of cereals is generally not available. It is therefore not 
advisable to develop a wholly grain-based fe eding system. The recommended policy is to 
identify and use locally available feed resources to formulate diets that are as balanced as 
possible (Branckaert . et al., 2000). 
 Full ad libitum feeding of a balanced ration is essential for poultry intensively managed in 
confinement, even on a small scale. The usual recommendation is for commercially 
manufactured feed, but many  farmers find it too costly and not in regular supply. The by-
products of processing of local crops (brans , and oil and seed cakes) can be used as both energy 
and protein sources (see Chapter 3 “Feed Resources”) but on their own cannot make a balanced 
ration. More research is needed on local feed resources as sources of trace elements, minerals 
and vitamins, especially from leaves, fruits, algae, fungi and other available materials. However, 
even with this knowledge, the skills of a well-equipped and experienced nutritionist are needed 
to formulate least-cost balanced rations. 
Breeding (genetic potential) 
Indigenous or local breeds are generally raised in FP production systems. These birds are 
exposed to natural selection from the environment for hardiness, running and flight skills, but 
not for egg production. Hens are thus poor layers, but good mothe rs (except for guinea hens). 
When farmers contemplate the adoption of a more intensive poultry production system, they are 
eager to purchase more productive birds. There is a need to find the best method to provide 
them with such birds, and the options are: 
90 Research and Development for family poultry 
x to supply hybrid strains, which requires the presence of well-managed hatchery facilities 
and (grand) parent stock, or  
x to supply pure -bred breeds, which allows the farmer to renew his flock and to remain 
independent from external suppliers. Unfortunately, pure-bred breeds are becoming more 
difficult and more expensive to purchase, and produce fewer eggs than hybrids. 
(Branckaert et al., 2000). 
Genetic improvement has been considered a high priority in poultry development projects. 
Usually vaccination programmes are carried out during genetic upgrading programmes, but feed 
supply to the im proved birds has not received sufficient attention. Thus it has not been possible 
to exploit the superior genetic potential of the improved birds. 
Marketing 
Poultry products in most developing countries, especially in Africa, are still expensive. The 
marketing system is generally informal and poorly  developed. Unlike eggs and meat from 
commercial hybrid birds (derived from imported stock), local consumers generally prefer those 
from indigenous stocks. The existence of a local market offering good sales opportunities and 
adequate transport facilities are obvious prerequisites for FP development. As most consumers 
with greater purchasing power live in and around cities, intensification of poultry production 
should be initiated in peri-urban areas or, at least, in areas having a good road network 
(Branckaert et al., 2000). 
 Traditional dealers and middlemen, who collect eggs and birds from the villages, facilitate 
the marketing of FP products in most developing countries. Such traditional marketing 
structures are often overlooked, bypassed or criticised. There has been a regrettable tendency in 
some countries to use government extension services or parastatals to market family poultry 
products. This practice should be discouraged as it is not sustainable. 
Farmer organizations 
Organizing FP farmers is not an easy task, fo r several reasons. Flock sizes are small and birds 
are maintained with minimal land, labour and capital inputs. Thus farmers generally consider FP 
a secondary activity compared with other agricultural activities. Nevertheless, it is essential to 
develop producer groups, which give member s easier access to essential inputs (such as feed, 
improved breeds, medicine, vaccines and technical adv ice) and to credit, training, transportation 
and the marketing of poultry products. Producer groups also encourage more educated people to 
initiate FP farming as a secondary activity (conducted at the family level using medium-sized 
flocks), as well as facilitating the development of associated activities such as market gardening, 
which can utilize poultry manure and help to reduce or remove household waste and pests 
(Branckaert  et al., 2000).  
 Farmers should be allowed to develop the market structures most suitable for them. Often 
women’s groups prove to be effective in marketing eggs along with oth er products at local 
markets. Such groups should be encouraged an d supported if they exist, but their establishment 
solely for FP may be unnecessary and unviable. 
 In a case study in the region of Niamey, Niger (Kobling, 1989), it was shown that 
smallholdings (less than 20 hens) of layers, which were situated beyond 2.5 km from a main 
paved road, could supply eggs and meat to the city market at competitive prices. Villages much 
farther from the main routes could supply live birds competitively but not eggs. Eggs are not an 
important food item at the village level, as it is a relatively high-priced protein food, and thus 
marketing may require cooperative efforts by producers to transport eggs to larger towns. 
Possibilities for this include using existing commercial trading channels or opening new 
channels such as those through producer associations, cooperatives, women’s groups or young 
farmer associations. The establishment of specialized poultry production cooperatives has 
proved difficult in many places, and socio-economic factors play an important part in this. 
Small-scale poultry production 91
Training and management 
As was emphasized at the beginning of this chapter by Bessei (1987), technical skills need to be 
considered at both farmer  and extension officer levels . Training is essential in the areas of 
disease control, housing, equipment, feeding, ge netic improvement and marketing. A basic 
knowledge of specific features of poultry anat omy and physiology is also important, to provide 
a basis for understanding the above topics. Ho using and management could be improved 
through appropriate farmer training, preferably conducted on-farm. Local craftsmen could be 
trained to manufacture small equipment, such as feeders and drinkers (Branckaert  et al., 2000). 
RESEARCH LESSONS LEARNED FROM COMPLETED PROJECTS 
Genetic upgrading 
This was the earliest and most commonly favour ed FP development strategy, and has been 
adopted and supported by many donors from the 1960s onwards. It has usually involved 
substantial investment in government infrastructure  (in terms of establishing farms and 
buildings to multiply stock numbers), and less investment in training village farmers or 
developing distribution networks for vaccine and medicine. The Cockerel Exchange Programme 
(CEP) represented the traditional approach, in which cockerels from exotic strains were reared 
up to 15 to 20 weeks of ag e, usually in government poultry farms, and then exchanged with 
local cockerels owned by FP households, which ke pt small flocks and were requested to remove 
or exchange all local cockerels. In addition, sometimes the flocks of the farmers (or of the whole 
village), were vaccinated against ND, and the farmers were given advice on poultry feeding and 
housing. 
 In the Machakos district of Kenya, an evaluation by Ballard (1985, as cited in Mbugua, 
1990) of the performance of hens upgraded throu gh a CEP in 1977 (using a layer hybrid strain 
cockerel) showed an increase in egg production of about 30 eggs per hen in a flock of nine hens 
and one cock (Table 10.3). 
Table 10.3 Production increase per hen of a nine-hen flock in Kenya 
Per hen, per year Local hens (before) Improved hens (after) 
Eggs per hen 57 87 
Eggs for consumption and sale 41 63 
Eggs for hatching 16 24 
Chicks hatched 11 17 
Birds for consumption and sale 3.2 4.9 
Source: Ballard, 1985 (as cited in Mbuga, 1990) 
The CEP method is criticised mainly because the raising of cockerels in government farms is 
costly, and exposure of the intensively raised cockerels to village conditions leads to 
considerable adaptation problems with resulting mortalities of 50 percent or more. Also, local 
cockerels are not always removed, as the farmer (quite rightly in many cases) distrusts the 
survival and mating ability of the exotic cockerel. The presence of the local cocks reduces the 
effectiveness of the attempt at genetic improvement, as they are easily able to compete for the 
favours of the local hens against the exotic breed cocks. 
 In view of the problems of the CEP, other method s have been develo ped, including the 
distribution of chicks, pullets and hatching eggs  of improved breeds. A comparison of the 
relative efficiency of these up grading methods (ter Horst, 1 987), based on the number of 
“improved” day-old chicks produced in the village over three years, showed that the distribution 
of hatching eggs was the most cost-effective method (as shown in Table 10.4 below). 
92 Research and Development for family poultry 
Table 10.4 Efficiency of strategies for improving poultry production 
Strategy Percent increase 
Distribution of pullets 15 
Exchange of cockerels 17 
Distribution of day-old chicks 67 
Distribution of hatching eggs 100 
Source: ter Horst, 1987. 
In operation, hatching eggs of selected lines are sold to families raising poultry. Local broody 
hens hatch the eggs. The chicks are raised by the hens and adapt easily to the environment. The 
distribution of hatching eggs is thus the least costly and most efficient method of genetic 
upgrading. This method has the following advantages and disadvantages. 
Advantages of distributing hatching eggs: 
x The eggs represent a low project cost, compared with pullets or cockerels. 
x The eggs convey 100 percent of genetic improvement, compared with cockerels or pullets, 
which contribute only 50 percent when crossed with local birds. 
x The young chicks are raised under natural conditions from day-old age, and develop or 
learn scavenging ability. 
Disadvantages of distributing hatching eggs: 
x Cockerels are generally more appreciated and accepted by the poultry farmers. This 
hampers the introduction of improved breeds through distribution of hatching eggs in the 
same area. 
x Transport of hatching eggs under rough co nditions and with unsuitable packaging reduces 
hatchability.
x The total replacement of local chickens by improved birds of exotic origin leads to: a loss 
of biodiversity of the local poultry population; a loss of brooding and hatching ability in 
the hen; and a breakdown of the self-sustained system of reproduction at the village level. 
These are serious problems and must also be considered. 
The words that follow come from a prominent Nigerian livestock expert, (Suleiman, 1990), but 
they reflect the growing appreciation of the genetic and environmental resources placed in the 
care of all people of all countries: “Perhaps the time has come for us to redefine the ideology for 
the development of African agriculture and indeed the entire economy. African agricultural 
ideology appears to be based on the premise that the genetic resources indigenous to the 
continent are inferior to those found elsewhere and as such they must be replaced or diluted to a 
large extent by gene tic materials foreign to the continent. Similarly, we have viewed our 
environment as hostile and, in fact, a direct threat to our existence. These postures have 
prevented us from capitalising on the strengths of our genetic and environmental resource 
endowments. We must move from a position of emphasizing the weaknesses of our resource 
endowments to one of amplifying their positive aspects, while seeking to overcome the 
weaknesses inherent in them.” 
Small-scale poultry production 93
Vaccination 
Protection against Newcastle Disease re quires three vaccinations during the six-month growing 
phase of pullets and cockerels. Depending on local conditions, between two and three 
vaccinations per year are needed for adult birds. Because of the limited resources of government 
veterinary services, it is necessary to build networks of private veterinarians, veterinary 
assistants and vaccinators to provide preventive veterinary care in remote rural areas, and to 
ensure a reliable supply of vaccines (with a cold  chain for the storage and distribution of 
conventional vaccines). In Bangladesh, the Department of Livestock Services established such a 
cold chain from the vaccine production laboratory to the village level in 1984. Within three 
years, 4 500 poultry farmers (especially women) were trained as village poultry vaccinators. 
The full cost of vaccination was charged to poultry producers in order to sustain the full cost of 
vaccine production and distribution. When it is possible to extend this fee to partly cover an 
extension service, it can result in the creation of a partly privatised poultry extension service. 
Such a system, financed by vaccination fees and the sale of exotic birds to farmers, was 
established in Sao Tome and Principe. 
Strategy combinations 
A combined approach, including vaccination  against ND, the provision of a regular water 
supply and feed supplements (household waste) and special care for the young chicks during the 
first weeks of life (for example, through imp roved night shelters and creep feeders), increases 
the number of eggs laid by about 100 percent as well as increasing the number of chickens 
raised per hen/year to between 10 and 12. 
 The introduction of genetic improvement, in combination with further improvement in 
feeding (compound feed), housing (s emi-confinement) and health (full vaccination and anti-
parasites), will again increase egg production by approximately 50 percent and egg weight by 
60 percent. 
RESEARCH LESSONS LEARNED FROM CURRENT PROJECTS 
Some countries have had successes in developing FP systems. In Egypt, the Fayoumi District 
Cooperative has raised the productivity and incomes of village FP producers. It distributes 
improved Fayoumi local birds and produces supplementary feed at its own feed mill using 
mostly local ingredients. It also assists farmers in marketing their eggs and birds. 
 In Malaysia, small flocks of poultry are fed  on “Domestic Feed”, a reduced-price feed 
marketed by feed millers with a lower “nutrient density” (balanced for all nutrients, but lower in 
energy because of the inclusi on of low-energy ingredients such as rice or wheat bran) than 
commercial broiler diets. In 1986, village egg and poultry meat production in Malaysia was 
estimated at 150 million eggs and 17,000 tonnes of meat, accounting for five percent of total 
egg production and seven percent of total poultry meat. Due to a high demand for village 
poultry meat, some of the backyard village poultry flocks have evolved into relatively large-
scale commercial village chicken producers. Some of these farms rear between 2 000 and 
15 000 young stock, which are then sold for growing under the traditional extensive system. 
 In Uganda, duck meat production rose from  600 to 3,500 tonnes in the 12 years between 
1980 and 1992. This was achieved by improving health care in the traditional small-scale FP 
units, with the result that average mortality decreased from over 40 percent in 1980 to less than 
eight percent in 1994 (Country Profile 1994). 
The Bangladesh model (FAO e-conference 2002) and research topics 
In Bangladesh, there has been a significant e ffort over the past 20 years to develop the FP 
system. The Bangladesh model was the subject of the second FAO/INFPD electronic conference 
on FP “The Bangladesh model and other experiences in FP development”, which was held in 
May-July 2002. All papers, comments and discussions were compiled and presented on the 
94 Research and Development for family poultry 
FAO/INFPD website (http://www.fao .org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/ fampo1/fampo.htm.) within two 
months of the conference conclusion.
 What was not covered in the e-conference about the Bangladesh situation was more detail on 
their views on research priorities and what progress they have made. Bangladesh determined 
five areas for research potential in FP: 
x disease;  
x feeding; 
x breeding;  
x marketing and socio-economics; and, 
x management and production. 
These are close to the same categories outlined above under the Technical Constraints section. 
Under the above five headings, the Bangladesh Department of Livestock Services poultry 
research committee suggested protocol outlines for research proposals in FP (those marked 
below with an asterisk were regarded as being of top priority as of October 2000), under the 
Bangladesh government’s poultry model FP improvement programme, which is currently 
(1998-2005) aided by the Asian Development Ba nk and Danida in two ongoing overlapping 
projects. 
 The protocol outlines were intended as guidance for formulating detailed research proposals 
or study proposals for post-graduate degrees or activities of research institutions or NGOs. The 
protocol outlines are detailed below: 
Disease 
x Disease prevalence study (epidemiology): 
- host bird (age, sex and breed); 
- morbidity and mortality; 
- management and feeding; 
- spatial and temporal factors; 
- parasitism and feed consumption efficiency; and 
- vaccine and vaccination failure. 
x In-depth study of major serious diseases: 
- identification, characterization and virulence of the causal agent; 
- serological characterization; and 
- pathogenicity.
x Development of a disease-control strategy based on vaccination: 
- vaccination schedule; 
- maternal antibody and its effects on immunization; and 
- establishment of diagnostic networks. 
x Development and improvement of vaccination: 
- development of vaccine types using local vaccine; 
- comparative study of local and imported vaccines; 
- comparing of heat tolerance selection in present ND vaccines with the use of I2 or V4 
strains; and 
- use of heat-tolerant ND I2 seed vaccine pr oduced in district veterinary laboratories 
using eggs from the same district. 
x Study of disease prevalence in different  locations and the seasonal effect of these on 
different breeds and breed combinations. 
x Study of the quantification of semi-scavenger losses associated with the main diseases, 
including possible remedial measures against these diseases. 
Small-scale poultry production 95
Feeding 
x Study of the possibilities of protein banks, and the cultivation of Ipil-ipil ( Leucaena),
duckweed and snails at the smallholder FP level. 
x Study of year-round nutrient availability for scavenging chicken under model key rearer 
conditions.
x Study of year-round protein production from various conventional and unconventional 
resources: 
- manure-based duckweed production in sh allow ponds with clean and polluted water 
sources; 
- protein supply from leaves, such as cassava, Leucaena, Sesbania, and Glyrecidia; and
- animal protein supply, for example from blood meal, rumen microbes, earthworms, 
insects, hatchery by-product waste, and leather by-products. 
x Study and nutritional evaluation of various feed ingredients used for feeding poultry under 
semi-scavenging conditions: 
- chemical composition; 
- nutritive value from feeding trials; and 
- preservation of feedstuffs. 
x Study of the effective optimum level of supplementation for semi-scavenging birds in 
different agro-ecological conditions, for all age groups of birds: 
- effect of supplementing protein meal (vegetable and animal protein); 
- effect of supplementing ener gy-rich feed (both conventional and unconventional); 
and
- effect of supplementing minerals with ingredients (both conventional and 
unconventional). 
x Nutrient recycling through manure-based protein prod uction under semi-scavenging 
conditions:
- energy flow of the FP farm (conventional and improved systems); and 
- protein economy (traditional FP and improved systems). 
x Study of how much and what combination of fee d ingredients is most economical as a feed 
for Model Key Rearers in different environments, seasons and regions. 
x Study of the utilization of non-conventional feed ingredients, such as tealeaf waste, 
duckweed, poultry litter, earthworms and insects (cultivated and natural), as protein 
sources for semi-scavenging poultry. 
x Study of the amount and composition of available feeds for scavenging and their seasonal 
and regional variations. 
x Study of the available Scavenger Feed Resource Base and the optimum chicken number 
density for sustainable semi-scavenging in the FP rearing system under Bangladesh socio-
economic conditions. 
x Comparison of crop-contents and feed weigh -back systems using the cafeteria system of 
feed supplementation. 
x Study of whether the cultivation of such chicken feed as earthworms, maggots, termites 
and cockroaches can be incorpor ated within the FP small-scale livestock development 
(SLD) system. 
x Study of how industrial by-products such as those from breweries and fish processing 
plants can be used as supplementary feed for the semi-scavenging FP model. 
Breeding 
x Comparative profitability studies between: two commercial cross-breeds (locally marketed 
as Harco and Nera, both derived by crossing Rhode Island Red (RIR) and Barred 
96 Research and Development for family poultry 
Plymouth Rock [BPR]); and also between the locally bred Sonali (RIR and Fayoumi); and 
pure “local” Fayoumi (an Egyptian breed multiplied in Bangladesh without artificial 
selection pressure, in confinement management conditions for the past 20 years); under 
both FP traditional scavenging and FP semi-scavenging (feed supplemented) systems. 
x According to previous studies and research, the Sonali was found to be superior in terms of 
meat and egg production, disease resistance and overall profitability in both the FP 
traditional scavenging and semi-scavenging systems. This research was undertaken by the 
Department of Livestock Services, the Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute (BLRI) 
(both supported by the now-completed Danida-assisted Small-scale Livestock 
Development project [SLDP-1], and the Bangladesh Agricultural University (BAU). 
Further study is planned to determine what type of selection index should be applied to the 
parent stocks, and under what type of environment, in order to improve its efficiency and 
performance under the semi-scavenging system. The parent stocks are the Fayoumi and 
RIR. This is related to a protocol suggested in the Marketing and Socio-economics 
category below. 
x Crossing of dominant Naked-Neck breeds with Fayoumi or RIR for higher egg production 
and meat production, disease resistance and profitability in scavenging and semi-
scavenging systems. 
x Crossing of Naked-Neck breeds with desi (local indigenous breeds), for increasing both 
size and brooding capacity. 
x Development and maintenance of grandparent stock, to maintain the breeding efficiency of 
RIR and Fayoumi.
x  Study of the performance of different bree d combinations under various environments, 
feeds and disease situations. 
x Conducting of stock density trials of different breeds and breed combinations, to determine 
the optimum FP flock size for best productivity. 
x Comparing the performance of commercial breeds with the desi and other “home-made 
combinations” made by Key Rearers, using broody hens under FP traditional and semi-
scavenging systems. 
Marketing and Socio-economics 
x Study of the impact of the Participatory Livestock Development project (PLDP) activities 
(expected duration 199 8-2003) on income generation,  employment and poverty in rural 
Bangladesh.
x Study of the impact of the SLDP concept on the nutritional health of women and young 
girls at the village level. An M.Sc. study on this subject has already been completed by a 
post-graduate student of the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University (KVL), 
Denmark (Nielsen, 2000). 
x Study of the nutritional status and effect on work capacity, as well as body mass ratios of 
both mother and children, in households using the FP semi-scavenger system, compared 
with those using the traditional FP system. 
x Comparative cost and returns analysis of po ultry production under the scavenging and 
confinement poultry farming systems. 
x Study of the changing role of women in livestock rearing under PLDP. 
x Study of the demand and supply of poultry products, identifying the constraints to 
successful market operations. 
x Study of the development of market intermediaries (middlemen) and their constraints in 
the project areas. 
x Study of the effect of NGO modes of operation  on the participation in and extension of 
poultry model practices. 
Small-scale poultry production 97
x Study of the socio-economic impact of sm allholder poultry production when combined 
with such other activities as vegetable production and fish-culture. 
x Comparative studies of the economy of egg and meat production between the scavenging 
and commercial systems. Examination of the economics of raising cockerels of Fayoumi
and Sonali at the village level. 
x Assessment of the extent to which PLDP and SLDP-1 were able to address the “gender 
gaps” in the socio-economic situation of Bangladesh, as w ell as determining how and 
where earnings from poultry were spent (for example, in social, health or education areas). 
x Study of the actual rate of interest faced by the beneficiaries of the various Poultry Model 
enterprises, and by the different NGOs partnered in PLDP. 
Management and production 
x Economic use of home-made heaters and fuels for artificial brooding and incubating 
systems. 
x Determination of the optimum construction an d design of a suitable low-cost brooder-
rearing house, using the raised slatted bamboo floor ( macha) system. Use of materials of 
various types, thicknesses and costs, with a view to providing the best ventilation with 
reasonable durability. 
x Use of appropriate items of equipment for hatching and rearing of chicks by broody hens. 
x Provision of low-cost appropriate accommodation with security measures for exotic birds 
of the Model Key Rearers. 
x Provision of low-cost lighting facilities for the Model Breeders. 
x Choice of low-cost suitable litter materials. 
x Determination of the optimum number of day-old chicks to be hatched for best manageable 
profitability by the Model Mini-Hatchery, by adopting improved appropriate technology 
devices. Determining the reasons for difficulties that some farmers encounter with this type 
of enterprise. 
x Comparative study of slatted floor and deep litter systems for the Model Breeder unit. 
x Conducting of density tr ials using different br eeds or breed combina tions to determine the 
optimum FP flock size. 
x Study of the profitability of the broody hen ( desi) for producing day-old chicks and as 
caretakers of exotic chicks as foster mothers, and the negative or positive effect on the 
scavenging behaviour of the chicks. 
x Determination of the optimum number of eggs that can be brooded by unit weight or 
feather density of the desi hen, and then the number of chicks that can be successfully 
reared up to eight weeks of age per desi hen, using the creep feeder system of 
supplementary feeding for growing chicks. 
x Study of the effect on the Model Key Rearers’ economy if desi hens are kept together for 
brooding purposes. 
Bangladesh model - research in progress 
A report on results (completed in mid-2002) from  the field-based part of the M.Sc. students’ 
research related to the production and health of rural scavenging poultry in Bangladesh was 
produced (Permin, 2002) by Danida’s Network for Smallholder Poultry Development (NSP) for 
an INFPD workshop held in Bangladesh in November 2002. Eight post-graduate veterinary and 
animal production graduates (with field expe rience in government service in Bangladesh) 
conducted FP field research (under the Dan ida and AsDB-assisted PLDP project) towards their 
M.Sc. (from KVL, Denmark), in the 10-month period from July 2001, in cooperation with the: 
x Department of Veterinary Microbiology, The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural 
University (KVL); 
x Department of Animal Science and Health, KVL; 
98 Research and Development for family poultry 
x Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences; 
x Institute for Anthropology, University of Copenhagen; 
x Bangladesh Agricultural University; 
x Participatory Livestock Development Project in Bangladesh; and 
x Danida. 
This effort represents the first time that animal scientists and veterinarians have worked together 
on solving problems directly related to rural poultry produc tion under the di fficult logistic 
conditions in the northwestern districts of Bangladesh covered by PLDP. It is also the first time 
that problems identified in the field by Danida-supported livestock projects (PLDP and SLDP) 
in Bangladesh have been fed back to the educational system in Denmark, creating the basis for a 
new M.Sc. course in rural poultry production and h ealth, supported by a number of research and 
educational institutions in Denmark and hosted by the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural 
University in Copenhagen. It is envisaged that the results will be passed on to responsible 
parties in government and NGOs working on rural development in Bangladesh, thereby 
enabling an adjustment of the present activities to the ultimate beneficiaries, the poor farmers.  
 The eight research projects covered a range of important problems relating to scavenging and 
semi-scavenging poultry production in Banglade sh, notably relating to disease and production 
aspects. The following list of the eight M.Sc. research project titles is not presented in order of 
importance, but in connected areas of relevance. 
x Helminthosis of free-range chickens in Bangladesh, with emphasis on prevalence and 
effect on productivity. 
x An epidemiological and experimental study of Newcastle Disease in village chickens of 
Bangladesh.
x Isolation and pathogenic characterizations of Infectious Bursal Disease (IBD) virus isolate 
from an outbreak of IBD in a rural poultry unit in Bangladesh. 
x A longitudinal study of the causes of mortality of chickens in parent stock flocks of the 
Department of Livestock Services of Bangladesh, with a special emphasis on Escherichia 
coli infection.
x Effect of vitamin A supplementation on vitamin A status, growth parameters and disease 
resistance of layer type chickens in Bangladesh. 
x A study of the effect of feed suppleme ntation on the laying hen unde r the rural conditions 
of Bangladesh. 
x A study of the effect of feeding systems on the egg production of Fayoumi hens of Model 
Breeding units under the PLDP project in Bangladesh. 
x A study of the egg production performance of different breeds and breed combinations of 
chicken in semi-scavenging systems in the PLDP project. 
The Malawi model 
Based on a Danida-sponsored study to ur to Bangladesh in 2000 (Chinombo et al., 2001), the 
Malawi Department of Animal Health and Industry learned that the Bangladesh smallholder 
poultry model is designed as an integrated system to provide the necessary supplies and services 
to establish an enabling environment for sustainable smallholder FP semi-scavenging 
production. The FP model consisted of smallholder fa rmers with small flocks of hens supported 
by a number of enterprises, all available in the village, to provide inputs and services needed to 
maintain these flocks. NGO-initiated and motivated farmer groups supported the model. 
Awareness programmes, training and access to micro-c redit was provided to the beneficiaries, 
the majority of whom were women. 
 The sustainability of the Bangladesh model relies on a unique implementing organizational 
structure, involving groups of FP smallholder women farmers, micro-credit, NGOs and 
government institutions. The study team suggested to their government that the model be 
Small-scale poultry production 99
replicated in Malawi, with appropriate modification to suit prevailing conditions. For example, 
Malawi has a much lower population density than Bangladesh and a less developed NGO 
infrastructure. It was therefo re recommended that the Bangladesh model, comprising eight 
income-generating elements, should be simplified. Results from the Malawi situation analysis 
(participatory rural appraisal) in the Danida project area showed that the poorest of the poor did 
indeed exist in the pilot area. By using the criteria of the farmer’s perspective, it was found that 
37 percent of all households belonged to this p oorest segment. It was also found that female-
headed households constituted 60 percent of the poorest segment. The analysis further revealed 
that poultry keeping has a high preference as an income-generating activity, in fact the highest 
among all livestock categories. The relative status of the importance of different types of 
livestock was ranked as: sheep, cattle, pigs, goats and chicken. 
The Danida-ENRECA experience in Africa 
The abbreviation ENRECA is derived from the Danida objective for the EN-hancement of RE-
search CA-pacity in Developing Countries. This is a programme concept of Danida’s (Danida-
KVL, 2002) in Africa, and involves one poultry project in the United Republic of Tanzania. The 
immediate aims of the ENRECA programme are to strengthen: 
x collaboration on planning and implementation of locally embedded research activities 
relevant to the national development of the developing countries; 
x education at Ph.D. and M.Sc. level; 
x the research environment, including such physical facilities as laboratories, libraries and 
communication facilities; and 
x the dissemination of research results to end-users locally as well as internationally. 
There are other new FP projects planned for student thesis work in the areas of: 
x Newcastle Disease epidemiology in rural poultry production (United Republic of 
Tanzania); 
x disease resistance of rural chicken (United Republic of Tanzania); 
x feeding - baseline data and management strategies (Malawi); 
x disease interaction - IBD in ducks and chickens (Kenya); and 
x Haemophilus paragallinarum infection in rural chicken (Uganda). 
Initial results from Enreca’s Phase 1 (1996-99) in the United Republic of Tanzania are available 
on the web site <http://www.poultry.kvl.dk/Research/Projects.htm>  for the project: “Improving 
the health and productivity of the rural chicken in Africa”, which has formed the basis on which 
priorities were laid out for a second phase of the project. In terms of collaborative research, the 
objectives of Phase 2 of the project are to: 
x determine optimal and efficient management, fee ding and disease control systems under 
rural conditions, and to implement such systems in selected villages; 
x identify and breed the most promising indig enous local chicken Haplotypes (ecotypes), in 
terms of disease resistance and productivity; 
x develop a sustainable Newcastle Disease vaccine campaign under field conditions; 
x study and explore the marketing st rategy of rural chicken products, to identify and classify 
the different poultry management systems wh ich exist in the study region and to examine 
the social, cultural and geographic determinants of these systems; and 
x train extension workers and rural farmers in better, but affordable, management, disease 
control methods and marketing strategies. 
Phase 2 of the project is focused on obtaining knowledge of optimal management conditions for 
FP rural chicken production in Africa. In continuation of this, a Phase 3 will be proposed within 
three years, to focus on promoting better poultry management practice s and disease control, 
specifically Newcastle Disease control at the village level and on a wider scale (whole districts 
rather than just a few villages). In addition, and most importantly, Phase 3 will focus on 
developing village cooperative societies, modelled on the Livestock and Poultry development 
projects in Bangladesh. In phase 3, models for establishing such cooperatives will be tested in 
the United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi and Kenya, in collaboration with government 
100 Research and Development for family poultry 
extension staff and scientists from agricultural, veter inary and social sciences. The farmer 
cooperatives will have farmers and farmer groups specialized in four production areas: 
x producing affordable feeds using locally available feed ingredients; 
x raising breeding stock and hatching chicks; 
x rearing chicks up to eight weeks of age; 
x raising chickens for egg production, sale of eggs and later sale of culls; and /or 
x raising chickens for meat under semi-intensive production systems. 
RESEARCH, TRAINING AND EXTENSION NEEDS 
The achievement of FP development objectives req uires a concerted effort, incorporating 
research, development and training. A coherent strategy should emphasize, but not be limited to, 
the following: 
x identification of research requirements and pr ogrammes, at both the strategic and adaptive 
levels;
x identification of development efforts for the two target groups: rural and peri-urban; 
x delivery of technological assistance to prod ucers with regard to input supply and product 
marketing; and 
x continuous training and retraining of technical staff involved in smallholder FP production 
at all levels. 
In many developing countries, only commercial small-scale intensive (broiler and layer) chicken 
production is part of the agriculture curriculum in schools. FP chicken production and the 
production of other poultry species are not cons idered at any level. For the development of FP 
production, it is important that this subject be included in the regular education and training 
schemes of agricultural generalists, as well as livestock and poultry specialists. It is also 
important that more research on the problems of FP producers be initiated, as this is a 
precondition for the successful development of FP production. Poultry and livestock specialists 
in Low Income, Food-Deficient Countries (LIFDCs) must come to accept that the family 
poultry system is of significant economic and social importance to their countries and is worthy 
of coordination, examination, intervention and development. 
 In the past, too much emphasis was given to the development of an autonomous poultry 
extension system, while the links between poultry production and other agricultural services 
were neglected. Even if the specialized poultry extension system is well organized and working 
effectively, its impact on the very large number of smallholder FP keepers (particularly in rural 
areas) will be very low. This is because government budgets can provide for only a few poultry 
extension specialists. It is therefore necessary to establish links between poultry specialists and 
established institutions such as general agricultural extension services, veterinary services, 
agricultural colleges and NGO services. It is important to revise the strategies and activities of 
existing poultry farms and stations, so that a considerable part of their capacity is devoted to 
indirect extension through general extension services. 
 A study of agricultural training and educational institutions in Africa (FAO, 1984) showed 
that livestock training facilities were mainly concentrated in North Africa and some West 
African countries. This means that some African countries do not have the institutional capacity 
to meet their manpower needs for livestock research, extension and development. It is important 
that national training institutions be strengthened through utilizing the manpower and training 
facilities available in other countries. The inauguration of a Regional Poultry Training 
Programme is an example of such cooperation. The international FP development programme of 
Danida’s Network for Smallholder Poultry Development (NSP) is commendable in its scope, 
and is committed to the education and training of national scientists and experts in the field. The 
Fellowships and Networks section later in this chapter presents more details on the NSP 
foundation, structure, objectives and activities. 
Small-scale poultry production 101
Transfer technology (extension) methodologies 
Transfer technology (extension) methodologies (Branckaert et al., 2000) should include a 
communication strategy for Small livestock Projects for a Food Production (SPFP) framework. 
A strategy is a systematic process which takes into account the project objectives, the results to 
be achieved and the technical activities to be carried out. In a participatory planning strategy, it 
is necessary to identify the needs of the stakeholders and target groups, in order to: 
x determine shared values and knowledge and the advantages of the project to be 
implemented; 
x identify the strengths and weaknesses of the topi cs to be disseminated and identify 
appropriate tools /media and methodologies; 
x assess the constraints (such as limited resources) which are likely to limit the range of 
alternative actions; 
x  assess opportunities and threats; 
x consider all alternative proposals given to achieve the objectives; 
x select the plan which appears to have the greatest chance of achieving the objectives; 
x implement the plan and its activities;  and 
x periodically monitor, evaluate and revise the plan /activities. 
A good extension methodolo gy should include a system atic, rational and pragmatic approach to 
planning, implementing, managing,  monitoring, and evaluating ef fective technology transfer to 
farmers. An information and extension programme such as the Strategic Extension Campaign 
(SEC) fits these criteria. FAO’s Re search, Extension and Training Division (SDR), has 
recommended this SEC package to AGA for the needs of FP extension. The methodology 
emphasises the importance of pe ople's participation in strategic planning and systematic 
management and implementation of information, extension and training programmes. Its 
training and extension strategies and messages are especially developed from the results of a 
participatory problem identification process regarding the causes or reasons for non-adoption, or 
inappropriate practices, of a given recommended technology or innovation. 
 SEC activities are geared to narrowing the gaps between existing and desired knowledge, 
attitudes, and appropriate practice levels of the target beneficiaries regarding the technology 
recommendations. The SEC programme is carried ou t over a relatively short time period, and 
aimed at increasing the awareness and knowledge level of target beneficiaries and altering their 
attitudes and behaviour so as to encourage a favourable adoption of given ideas or sustainable 
technologies. It follows a systems-approach , which starts with a survey of the target public's 
Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (a KAP survey), the results of which are used as planning 
inputs and benchmark baselines for evaluation purposes. 
 For more detail on how to identify the problem s to be faced and overcome in using the SEC 
(Strategic Extension Campaign) approach, the reader is referred the full text of the paper 
(Branckaert  et al., 2000). 
Target populations 
The primary target beneficiaries should be the poorest households, women (in particular widows 
and female-headed households), the disabled (often as a result of civil conflict), women's groups 
and schools. 
Women 
Rural women carry out a fundamental role in agricultural production, rural development and 
food security. FAO studies and statistics show that women produce between 60 and 80 percent 
of food in Africa and Asia and approximately 40 percent in Latin America. In many regions, 
women are also resp onsible for the man agement of small livestock, includin g reproduction. An 
appropriate approach to working with women and poultry will not only boost productivity and 
reduce work time, workload and strain, but also promote the transfer of appropriate technology 
knowledge, tools and skills. 
102 Research and Development for family poultry 
 Numerous disparities persist regarding the participation of rural women in poultry 
production. Undoubtedly they face greater difficulties than men with regard to access to input 
resources (such as land and credit, among others) and to services designed to increase 
productivity, for example, research, technolog y transfer and extension services. Training 
programmes for women should be planned taking into account their socio-cultural traditions and 
their high illiteracy rate. In many regions, such programmes should also consider the training of 
women as extension workers, in order to effectively reach this important target audience. 
Youth
During FAO World Food Day (1999), the theme “Youth against hunger” was given 
considerable attention, together with the significant role that youth can play in food security. An 
important message from this event is that given adequate training, education and support, young 
people can become active partners in helping to meet the World Food Summit goals of halving 
the number of the hungry by the year 2015. 
 In terms of technology transfer, many government agricultural extension services include 
rural youth programming as an integral part of their overall work to help women, men and 
young farmers apply new practices. An even larger number of NGOs, through extension-type 
programmes, work to assist youth audiences in the use of improved agricultural technology. 
 Some of the features of rural you th programmes that make them particularly valuable include 
their ability to successfully promote the application of technology, such as poultry production, 
to improve agricultural production on a sustainable basis. Experience has shown that young 
people are usually more open to new ideas and  practices than adult farme rs. Most programmes 
also focus on the start-up of agricultural and rural-based non-agricu ltural income-generating 
activities. Any attempt to enhance the knowledge, skills and experience of young people, and 
increase their access to resources through rural youth programmes, will have an immediate 
impact on food security. 
 Rural youth programming, as a technology transfer mechanism, has the potential to 
overcome some of the major constraints related to expanding FP production in developing 
countries mentioned earlier in this paper, such as training, management, group organization, 
disease control, feeding, genetic improvement and protection against predators. 
 There are already some experiences in de veloping countries related to the training and 
education of rural youn g people in the area of poultry, that, if supported more fully and 
expanded to other countries, could contribute significantly to more efficient and effective egg 
and meat production. 
 Through community-based non-formal ed ucational programming, rural youth gain the 
necessary knowledge, skills and experiences enabling them to be productive today, as well as to 
become better farmers for the future. It is essential for farmers to have some knowledge of basic 
agricultural science related to their daily wo rk. Without this knowledge, the technology often 
manipulates farmers, often forcing them to act in ways they do not understand, which can be a 
severe hindrance to effective technology transfer. 
 Individual and group poultry project activities have been a part of youth programming in 
some countries for many years. There are two primary ways of reaching young people in rural 
areas. One is through community-based rural youth programmes, which target out-of-school 
rural young people. The other is using the rural schools by incorporating agricultural topics as 
an integral part of the regular curriculum or as extracurricular activities. 
 Basic poultry science is easily adapted to either co mmunity-based groups or school 
programmes. The most effective way to work with youth in a practical way, either in the 
community or the schools, is through non-form al education methodology using a hands-on, 
experiential approach to learning. Community yo uth members learn such things as basic poultry 
anatomy and physiology through structured group learning activities and then apply the 
knowledge to practical experiences, planning and carrying out individual and group small-scale 
poultry projects. 
Small-scale poultry production 103
 Where proper facilities are available, small-scale poultry projects can be carried out on the 
school grounds. Students can learn first-hand many of the practical aspects of raising chickens. 
The study of embryology by hatching chicken eggs  is particularly well suited to the classroom. 
Much can be learned by students from the incub ation and hatching of chicken eggs. Experience 
around the world has shown that this activity generates much interest and excitement among 
young people as they anxiously wait 21 days for the eggs to hatch. 
 One of the constraints to expand ed FP production in developing countries is the difficulty of 
helping farmers organize themselves into groups and associations. This is not a problem where 
farmers as youth had the experience of being a me mber of a community or school agricultural 
club. Belonging to a formal group offers the young person experiences of democratic action 
with elected officers and structured decision-making. The communication and leadership skills 
gained enable youth to make immediate contributions to their communities. These skills also 
help them accept formal and informal leadership roles in community and farmers’ organizations 
as adults. 
 Through school and community-based rural youth programmes dealing with FP production, 
youth learn and practice knowledge and skills related to sanitation, vaccination, housing 
construction using low-cost naturally available materials, predator control, adequate nutrition, 
improved breeds of chickens and alternative marketing strategies. 
 As a mechanism for technology transfer, youth programmers, when given adequate support, 
can make a significant contribution to expanding FP production in developing countries. Young 
people learn basic principles and sound practices of raising poultry through practical, hands-on 
projects and activities, enabling them to successfully start and maintain a small enterprise in an 
efficient and effective manner, thus contributing to food security. 
Disabled - handicapped 
During the past decades in many developing countries, civil wars, international conflicts and the 
dissemination of mines (with their terrible consequences), along with the propagation of 
handicapping diseases and the increase in traffic accidents, have been responsible for a 
considerable increase in the number of disabled persons. 
 For the disabled, FP raising represents a valuable  occupation, providing excellent revenue 
and enabling them to rejoin the social community. Many disabled persons are literate and can 
thus easily be approached and trained. 
Rural workers 
Whatever their gender or age, livestock vaccinat ors, extension workers and rural development 
agents need some basic socio-cultural information in order to improve their impact in 
technology transfer. 
 The vaccinator needs to know the reasons for the non-adoption of the technology and must 
be prepared to provide the farmer with a relevant demonstration or  explanation. The extension 
worker should develop extension and training programmes according to the farmer's knowledge 
and information need. Finally, the development agent should be able to explain the positive 
advantages for the rural community in having members develop income-generating activities. 
Specific training programmes and teaching materials, using appropriate media, should be 
produced to cover these requirements. 
RESEARCH DATA REQUIREMENTS 
In anticipation of development assistance under the Special Programme For  Food Security 
(SPFS), FAO provided guidelines for FP field surveys and research (Mack, 1998). Any research 
or Participatory Rural Appraisal undertaken for FP should ensure that the following list is 
consulted regarding data collection: 
x number of households owning poultry; 
104 Research and Development for family poultry 
x average flock size and breed type; 
x flock structure: number of laying hens, cocks, chicks and immature birds; 
x average number of eggs laid per clutch and number of clutches per year; 
x use of eggs (hatching, sale or home consumption); 
x details of any seasonal variation in production or mortality; 
x use of male birds and cull hens (sale or consumption); 
x selling price (and seasonality) of live birds and eggs at the farmgate and local market; 
x estimated income from sale of live birds and eggs; 
x estimated production costs (for example, vaccines and feed); 
x type of housing provided; 
x feeding regime; 
x disease control /vaccinations (type and frequency); 
x estimates losses (through disease, predators and theft); 
x access to goods and services (extension, input supply and marketing); 
x perceived constraints; and 
x opportunities for expansion. 
Sources of information 
Sources for this data could include livestock and agricultural census figures and Veterinary 
Department records, including: 
x vaccination campaigns; 
x number of vaccines given; 
x supply of locally produced and imported vaccines and their costs; and 
x subsidies.  
Veterinary Departments should have information on the major epizootic and parasitic diseases 
that occur in a country, and increasingly there  are sections dealing with epidemiology. The 
Ministry of Agriculture, poultry research institutes and parastatal organizations are sources of 
information on the technology available, past development experience and the supply of 
breeding stock, usually from state farms. 
 Another information source is FAO country prod uction data, which is based on government-
submitted information and locally undertaken household surveys or Participatory Rural 
Appraisals. Other sources include universities, nutrition and home economic departments, the 
Agricultural Census Office, NGOs and bilateral agencies. 
 National crop data allows for the use of conversion factors to estimate the supply of agro-
industrial by-products and broken grains. Availability is always a concern as these products 
have many alternative demands, and cost is an important factor. Reports on availability of non-
conventional feeds often indicate these alternative uses. Import statistics can give an indication 
of the level of self-suf ficiency for the major animal food produ cts, including eggs and poultry 
meat. Government household surveys, agricultural census data and local rural appraisal surveys 
may also provide information on levels of house hold consumption. If a commercial stock-feed 
sector exists, they may provide additional information on: 
x type of goods (such as feeds, chicks, drugs and vaccines) and services (such as veterinary, 
public health and abattoirs) that are available and how accessible they are; 
x disease situation; and  
x supply and demand of feed ingredients. 
Small-scale poultry production 105
DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
Many agricultural policy-makers (including livestock specialists) believe that the smallholder 
poultry system should be considered only as a means of subsistence, and as such needs no 
coordination, examination, intervention or development. Such notions must be challenged and 
changed. 
 Since FAO’s first technical assistance project (BGD/79/003) for FP in Bangladesh in 1979, 
FAO (AGA) has identified, formulated, backsto pped and monitored (with the financial 
assistance of UNDP and the FAO Technical Cooperation Programme [TCP]), many projects 
supporting FP development activities. The countries involved have included Bangladesh, 
Burundi, the Democratic Republic  of Congo, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, 
Ethiopia, the Gambia, Honduras, Maldives, Madagascar, Myanmar, Nigeria, the Philippines, 
Rwanda, Somalia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Turkey, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe. 
 The FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) was launched in 1994 by the FAO 
Director-General to respond to the urgent need  to boost food production . In 1997, improved 
household poultry production - either peri-urban or rural - was identified as a key element in the 
overall SPFS approach, and as a major activity of the SPFS diversification component. 
 The SPFS presently covers 40 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. It is rapidly 
expanding, with more than 60 countries expected to join it during the next few years. The 
collaboration between SPFS and INFPD will grow simultaneously. The development of South-
South cooperation in the field of rural FP is encouraged through the use of Technical 
Cooperation between Developing Countries (TCDC) experts. Since 1997, important support has 
also been provided by FAO’s Telefood pr ogramme. Up to US$10 000/group has been 
distributed for small-scale FP projects in several countries (Branckaert  et al., 2000). 
Productivity objectives 
What is required to maximize the productivity of family poultry production systems? First, the 
whole web of interdependent factors affecting the overall activities of the family farming 
system, along with the ir advantages an d constraints, must be fully understood. It is certain that 
village production will continue as long as there are villages, but various aspects of the 
production system need to be carefully modifie d. For example, it is now known that vaccination 
against Newcastle Disease can improve chick survival rate from 30 up to 70 percent; simple 
housing and other predator protection is required  for chicks and young growers; supplementary 
feeds are important; and other poultry species such as ducks, guinea fowls, pigeons and quails 
need to be considered. 
 FP is a vehicle for rural development, income-generation and nutritional enhancement. It is 
clear that the presence of flourishing industria l peri-urban poultry farms does not negate the 
need for a parallel FP system in rural areas. Priority must be placed on the development of 
appropriate technologies, the provision of extension services, farmer training, input and output 
transportation, markets and credit supply. 
 It is not appropriate to co ncentrate entirely on boosting food pr oduction at all costs without 
concern for who produces the food and with what type of management system. FP systems 
reflect the need to increase job opportunities, stimulate the development of associated non-
farming, rural activities and generate benefits that accrue equally to all segments of society, 
urban as well as rural. 
Fellowships and networks 
Development is an ongoing process that requires feedback and constant interaction between 
operators and the knowledg e network, both local and international. The restructuring of the 
agricultural and livestock extension system towards this approach is an important strategy in 
poultry development. FAO’s Travelling or Visiting Fellowships and regular consultations on 
poultry development are other examples. 
106 Research and Development for family poultry 
INFPD
The International Network for Family Poultry Development (INFPD), which is supported by 
FAO, can play a useful role in this regard by promoting: 
x exchange and distribution of publications; 
x participation in regional and international congresses;  and 
x the organization of biannual workshops on specialised topics. 
The role of the INFPD was expanded from its Afri can focus in 1997, and in December of that 
year, the first international workshop “Issues in Family Poultry Development Research: Current 
Concepts in Family Poultry Development Research” was held in M’Bour, Senegal. Proceedings 
of the workshop (Sonaiya 2000) are also available at: 
www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampo1/proceed.htm
Danida’s Poultry Network 
Danida’s “Danish Network for Poultry Produc tion and Health in Developing Countries” was 
established as a concept in Denmark in 1997 and then renamed the “Network for Smallholder 
Poultry Development” (NSP) when it became operational in Augu st 1999. The objective of the 
NSP is “poverty alleviation and improved welfare of the moderate and extreme poor in rural 
areas”. To achieve this, the overall scope of work for the NSP coordination unit is to initiate and 
coordinate resource bases related to village poultry production in the Danida programme 
countries (and in Denmark) and to build institutional capacity to implement poultry projects. 
The coordination unit will promote and carry out research, education and planning of projects, 
based on experience with the FP smallholder concept in Bangladesh and other countries. This 
will ensure that necessary education, training, and research will be integrated into the Danida 
development sector programmes or funded as independent activities. The coordination unit 
assists in fund-raising for these activities from Danish and international sources. Further 
information can be found on the website: <http://www.poultry.kvl.dk> 
Socio-economic objectives 
To develop effective strategies for fam ily poultry development, some inefficient aspects of 
traditional production must be replaced by more suitable methods. The main socio-economic 
objectives of FP development should be to: 
x increase rural and peri-urban lab our productivity and family incomes through increasing 
poultry productivity;  and 
x ensure a high level of food security and raise nutritional levels of rural and peri-urban 
families. 
Development strategies 
The overall aims of development are to reduce poverty and improve income and nutrition. To 
develop effective strategies for FP development, traditional but inefficient methods of 
production must be replaced by more suitable me asures. The main objectives of such strategies 
should be: 
x improving food supply; 
x creating income and employment opportunities for rural populations; 
x conserving environmental resources; 
x maintaining biodiversity;  and 
x promoting respect for socio-cultural values. 
Small-scale poultry production 107
Abbreviations and Conversions 
AfDB  African Development Bank 
AsDB  Asian Development Bank 
BAU  Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh 
BCRDV  Baby Chick Ranikhet Disease Vaccine 
BLRI Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute, Savar 
DLS  Directorate of Livestock Services 
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
GoB  Government of Bangladesh 
GVC  Government Veterinary College 
IBD  Infectious Bursal Disease (Gumboro disease) 
IBDV  Infectious Bursal Disease Vaccine 
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 
KVL  The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University ( Den Kongelige 
 Veterinære Landbohøjskole )
LIFDC  Low Income, Food-Deficient Countries 
ME  Metabolisable Energy 
ND Newcastle Disease (RD: Ranikhet Disease) 
NDV  Newcastle Disease vaccine 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organization 
NN  Naked Neck (Local breed) 
NSP Network for Smallholder Poultry Development (Danida) 
PLDP  Participatory Livestock Development Project 
RIR  Rhode Island Red (American poultry breed) 
SFRB  Scavengeable Feed Resource Base 
Sonali  Bangladeshi poultry breed (“The Golden bird”) 
SPFP  Small livestock Projects for F ood Production (FAO) 
SPFS  Special Programme for Food Security (FAO) 
TCDC  Technical Cooperation between Developing Countries (FAO) 
TCP Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO) 
Uppazila  sub district, formerly a thana 
Velogenic  highly virulent ND  
Conversions 
Linear measure 
Feet to metres x 0.3048; 3 feet is 0.91 m or 91 cm 
Stock Density 
Square feet/bird to Birds/square metre uses an inverse relationship with the multiplier of 
0.0929sq.m = 1 sq.ft. Using a calculator, the formula is: 
0.0929 M+ then [sq.ft/bird] x, MR, =, /, /, 1, = gives [birds/sq.metre] or 
108 Abbreviations and Conversions 
0.0929 M+ then [birds/sq.metre], x, MR, =, /, /, 1, =, gives [sq.ft/bird] 
For example: 4.0 sq.ft/bird = 2.7 birds/sq.m 
Energy
There are 4.1868 megajoules (MJ) or  kilojoules (kJ) per megacalorie (Mcal) or kilocalorie 
(kcal) of energy. The joule is the newer metric format to measure energy. 
Example 1: a feed with a metabolisable energy (ME) value of 2300 kcal ME/kg is now stated as 
9.6 MJ ME/kg (2300 x 4.1868 / 1000). 
Example 2: a SFRB per household of 468 Mcal of ME is now stated as 1960 MJ of ME. 
109 Small-scale poultry production
Bibliography
Abdou, F.H., Katule, A.M. & Sukuzi, O.S.  1990. Effect of the pr e-incubation storage period 
of hatching eggs on the hatchability and post-hatching growth of local chickens under 
tropical conditions. Beitrage zur Tropischen Landwirtscahft und Veterinarmedizin  28: 337-
342. 
Acharya, R.M. & A. Kumar.  1984. Performance of local birds in South Asia. Indian poultry 
industry yearbook. 7th Edition. 
Adene, D.F. 1990. An appraisal of the health management prob lems of rural poultry stock in 
Nigeria. In E.B. Sonaiya ed.  Rural Poultry in Africa-Proceedings International Workshop 
held at Ile-Ife, Nigeria: 89-99. 
Adene, D.F. & Ayandokun, J.O.  1992. The unfolding order in diseases of poultry in tropical 
Africa, Proceedings XIX World Poultry Congress, Amsterdam, 2: 152-153. 
Adesiyun, A.A., Bishu, G., Adegboye, D.S., & Abdu, P.A. 1984. Serological survey of 
Salmonella pullorum antibody in chickens around Zaria, Nigeria. Bulletin Animal Health 
and Production in Africa, 32: 81-85. 
Adeyanju, S.A., Ogutuga, D.B.A., Sonaiya, E.B. & Eshiett, N.  1978. Evaluation of cocoa 
husk in finishing diets for broilers. Turrialba 27: 371-375. 
Adeyanju, S.A., Ilori J.O. & Osuntogun, C.A. Poultry Farming in Ondo State , undated. 
Monograph, Ile-Ife, Nigeria. Departmen t of Animal Science, Obafemi Awolowo University. 
20 pp. 
Adjovi & Demey, 1992. Unpublished – reference in Chapter 3 on earthworms for poultry feed. 
Ahmad, A. & Hasnath, M.A. 1983. Proceedings SABRAO Workshop on Animal Genetic 
Resources in Asia and Oceania, Tropical Agricultural Research Centre, Japan. 418-422. 
Ahmed, N.  1987. Strategies for livestock disease control for small farmers. Asian 
Livestock,12(10): 110-113. 
Ahmed, N. 1994. Backyard Poultry feeding systems in Bangladesh. Asian Livestock XIX, 7: 73-
79. 
Aini, I . 1990. Indigenous chicken production in south-east Asia. World Poultry Science 
Journal, 46: 125-132 
Akinokun, O. 1975. The Ife foundation stock of Nige rian chickens: Body weight, egg weight 
and sexual maturity. Nigerian Agric. Journal 12: 232-239. 
Akpapunam, M.A. & Markakis, P.  1981. Protein supplementation of cowpeas with sesame 
and watermelon seeds. J.Food Sci., 49: 960. 
Alao, E.A.O. & Sonaiya, E.B. 1991. Evaluation of cowpea testa as a protein source for poultry 
nutrition. Project report to the Department of Animal Science, Obafemi Awolowo 
University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria. 
Alam, J. 1997. Impact of smallholder livestock development project in some selected areas of 
rural Bangladesh. In Livestock for Rural Development ( available at 
www.cipav.org.co/lrrd/lrrd9/bang932.htm). 
Alders, R.G., Inoue, S. & Katongo, J.C . 1994. Prevalence and evaluation of Hitchner B1 and 
V4 vaccines for the control of Newcastle disease in village chickens in Zambia . Prev. Vet. 
Medicine, 21(2): 125-132. 
Asuquo, B.O., Okon B.O. & Ekong , A.O. 1992. Quality parameters of Isa Brown and 
Nigerian Local Chicken eggs. Nig. Journal Anim. Prod., 19: 1-5. 
Atteh, J.O. & Ologbenla, F.D.  1993. Replacement of fishmeal with maggots in broiler diets: 
effects on performance and nutrient retention. Nig. Journal Anim. Prod. 20: 44-49. 
Australian Agricultural Consultancy & Management Company (AACMC),  1984. 
Livestock subsector Review, 1, Annex.3.  
Bibliography 110 
Ayorinde, K.L.  1987. Changes in anatomical po ints of the guinea hens in lay.  Nig. Journal 
Anim. Prod. 14: 121-123. 
Ayorinde, K.L., Ayeni, J.S.O. & Okaeme, A.N.  1984. The production potential of different 
varieties of the indigenous helmet guinea fowl ( N.m. galeata Pallas ) and the exotic Golden 
Sovereign (N.m. meleagris) in Nigeria. Proceedings 9th Annual Conference of the Nigerian 
Society for Animal Production, Nsukka, Nigeria, 65-72. 
Ba, A.S. 1982. L´art vétérinaire des pasteurs saheliens . Fondation pour le Progrès de l´Homme 
et ENDA, Dakar: 73-82. 
Baksh, I. 1994. Permaculture for Poultry. African Farming, 1994 (Jan- Feb), 13-14. 
Barua, A., Howlider, M.A.R. & Yoshimura, Y.  1998. Indigenous Naked Neck fowl of 
Bangladesh. World’s Poultry Science Journal, 54, (Sept.1998): 279-286. 
Beker & Banaerjee, 1990. Cited by Sharnawany and Banerjee, 1991.  
Bell, I.G., Nicholls, P.J., Norman, C., Ideris, A. & Cross, G.M.  1991. The resistance of meat 
chickens vaccinated by aerosol with a live V4 Newcastle disease virus vaccine in the field to 
challenge with velogenic Newcastle disease virus. Australian Vet. Journal, 68: 97-101. 
Bell, J.G . 1990. Strategies for the control of Newcastle disease in village poultry flocks in 
Africa. Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production , 9-13 
October, 1990, Thessaloniki, Greece, 1: 138-143. 
Bell, J.G., Belarbi, D.A. & Amara, A.  1990a. A controlled vaccination trial for Newcastle 
disease under village conditions. Prev. Vet. Medicine, 9(4): 295-300. 
Bell, J.G., Kane, M. & Le Jan, C . 1990b. An investigation of the disease status of village 
poultry in Mauritania. Prev. Vet. Medicine, 8(4): 291-294. 
Bessei, W.  1987. Tendencies of world poultry production .  Paper presented at the 3 rd
International DLG-Symposium on Poultry Production in Hot Climates, June 1987, Hameln, 
Germany. 
Bishop, J.P. . Undated. Protected Free-Range: 1. Movable Henhouse with Free-Access Range 
Run for Single-Sire Flock of 25. Poultry Development Service, Marysville, USA. 
Bishop, J.P. . Undated. Protected Free-Range: 2. Movable Brooderhouse with Free-Access 
Range Run for Natural Re production of 25 Chicks .  Poultry Development Service, 
Marysville, USA. 
Bizimana, N . 1994. Traditional Veterinary Practice in Africa. Deutsche Gessellscahft für 
Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH.  Schriftenreihe der GTZ,No 243, Eschborn. 
Bourzat & Saunders , 1987. Improvement of traditional methods of poultry production in 
Burkina Faso. Proceedings 3rd International Symposium on Poultry Production in Hot 
Climates, June, 1987, Hameln, Germany,: 12-15. 
Branckaert, R.D.S. 1968. Nouvelles données sur l’utilisation des tourteaux de coton en 
alimentation animale. Zootechnica 17(1): 42-50. 
Branckaert, R.D.S. & Guèye, E.F. 1999. FAO’s programme for support to family poultry 
production. In F. Dolberg & P.H. Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty Eradication 
and Promotion of Gender Equality,  244-256 pp. Proceedings workshop, March 22-26, 1999, 
Tune Landboskole, Denmark (also available at: 
 http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/24-Branckaert.htm). 
Branckaert, R.D.S., Gaviria, L., Jallade, J. & Seiders, R.W.  2000. Transfer of technology in 
poultry production for developing countries. In FAO Sustainable Development Dimensions ,
October 2000 and Proceedings WPC2000 Montreal, Canada (under same title also available 
at www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampo1/links.htm). 
Burgess, G.W . 1992. The development of commercial  antigen and antibody detection assays 
for Newcastle disease virus. In P.B. Spradbrow, ed. Proceedings International Workshop 
Newcastle Disease in Village Chickens: control with thermostable oral vaccines . 6-10 
111 Small-scale poultry production
October, 1992, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, ACIAR Proceedings ACIAR Monograph No. 39: 
25-28. 
Bussi, B . 1987. Disease as a constraint on produc tivity in extensively managed poultry.
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh. (MSc thesis). 
Chabeuf, N.  1990. Disease prevention in smallholder village poultry production in Africa .
Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production, 9-13 October, 
1990. Thessaloniki, Greece (1): 129-138. 
Chavunduka, D.M. 1976. Plants regarded by Africans as being of medicinal value to animals. 
Rhodesian Vet. Journal, 7(1), 6-12. 
Chen, Bao-Ji. 1991. Duck production in the Far East and South Pacific. Poultry International,
30 (1): 14-18. 
Chinombo, D., Jere, J., Kapelemer-Phiri, G. & Schleiss, K . (2001). The Malawi smallholder 
poultry production model (MSPPM): A Poverty reduction strategy .  Livestock, Community 
and Environment . Proceedings 10th Conference of the Association of Institutions for 
Tropical Veterinary Medicine, 2001, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Chowdhury, S.D., Roy, C.R. & Sarker, A.K.  1996. Urea in poultry nutrition. Asian-
Australasian Journal Animal Sciences 9(3): 241-245. 
Coligado, B.C., Lambio A.L. & Luis E.S. 1986. U.P.L.B. Res, 5: 10-13. 
Country Profile, 1994. Country Profiles or Around the World: Uganda on ducks. Poultry
International, 33. 
Copland, J. W. 1987. Newcastle Disease in Poultry: A New Food Pellet Vaccine.  ACIAR 
Monograph No. 5: 119. 
Creswell, D.C. & Gunawane, B.  1982. Indigenous chickens in Indonesia: production 
characteristics in an improved environment . Research Institute for Animal Production, 
Bogor, Indonesia. Report No. 2: 9-14. 
Dalziel, J.M. 1937. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. Crown Agents, London, 612 pp. 
Danida-KVL 2002. Improving the health and productivity of the rural chicken in Africa
(United Repubilc of Tanzania).Danida-KVL research results 1996-99 Tanzania. Improving 
the health and productivity of the rural poultry in Africa  - 2nd phase of an Enreca project 
(both also available at www.poultry.kvl.dk/IVM_Enreca.htm). 
Danvivatanaporn, J.  1987. Thailand - Poultry production. In J .  W .  C o p l a n d ,  e d .  Newcastle
Disease in Poultry: A New Food Pellet Vaccine. ACIAR Monograph No. 5: 108-109. 
De Vries, H. 1995. Performance of free range hybrids in Nicaragua. ILEIA,p.28.
Egbe, O. 1989. Utilization of palm oil effluent in layer's diet as an alternative source of energy. 
In: G.M.Babatunde, ed.  Proceedings National Workshop Alternative Formulations of 
Livestock  Feeds in Nigeria.  ARMTI, Ilorin. Economic Affairs Office, The Presidency, 723-
734. 
Eissa, Y.M. 1987. Prevalent poultry diseases in hot climate zones and problems of their control. 
Zootecnica International, (Feb): 60-62. 
Elson, H.A. 1992. Evaluation of economic aspects of housing systems for layers.  Proceedings 
XIX World's Poultry Congress, Amsterdam, 2: 503-508. 
Fabiyi, J.P. 1980. Survey on lice infesting domestic fowl on the Jos Plateau, Northern Nigeria. 
Bulletin Animal Health and Production in Africa, 28: 215-219. 
FAO, 1961. Marketing eggs and poultry, by Stewart and Abbott. FAO Animal Production and 
Health Series No. 5 and FAO Marketing Guide No. 4. Rome. 
FAO, 1984. Rapport de l’Atelier FAO sur le développement de l’aviculture rurale dans les pays 
francophones de l’Afrique de l’ouest, centrale et de l’est. Rome. 
FAO, 1987. Construction and operation of small solid-wall bins by O. Bodholt and A. Diop. 
FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No. 69. Rome. 
Bibliography 112 
FAO, 1988. The role of women in the adoption of new practices . Paper presented at the World 
Conference on Animal Production, Helsinki, 1988. 18 pp. 
FAO/UNDP, 1989. Small Stock Development Project in North Kivu, Zaire. Monograph, Rome. 
Farina, L., Demey, F. & Hardouin, J.  1991. Production de termites pour l'aviculture 
villageoise au Togo. Tropicultura ,9 (4): 181-187. 
Farrell, D.J . 1986. Energy expenditure of laying ducks: confined and herded. In D.J. Farrell  
and P. Stapleton, eds.  Duck Production Science and World Practice , 70-82. University of 
New England, Armidale, NSW. 
Farrell, D.J.  1997. Integrated wetland rice and duck production systems in humid tropics of 
Asia: Current and future trends . Proceedings 11 th European Symposium on Waterfowl ,
Nantes (France), 483-489. 
Fatihu, M.Y., Ogbogun, V.C., Njoku, C. O., & Saror, D.I.  1992. Observations on lesions 
associated with some gastrointestinal nematodes of chickens in Zaria, Nigeria.  Bulletin 
Animal Health and Production in Africa, 40(1), 15-18. 
Fattah, K.A., 1999. Poultry as a tool in poverty eradication and promotion of gender equality.
In F. Dolberg and P.H. Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty Eradication and 
Promotion of Gender Equality,  pp.16-28. Proceedings workshop, March 16-22 1999, Tune 
Landboskole, Denmark (also available at http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/2-
Fattah.htm). 
Forssido, T. 1986. Studies on the meat production potential of some local strains of chickens in 
Ethiopia. Justus-Liebig University, Giessen, Germany. (PhD thesis). 
French, K.M . 1981. Practical Poultry Raising s. Peace Corps Information Collection and 
Exchange, pp.153-168. Washington, DC. 
Fuan, Liu 1987.   The parched rice incubation technique for hatching duck eggs. In D.J.Farrell 
and P. Stapleton, eds. Duck Production Science and World Practice , pp.178-182. University 
of New England, Armidale, NSW. 
Gaffar Elamin, M.A., Khalafalla, A.I., & Ahmed, S.M.  1993. Observations on the use of 
Komarov strain of Newcastle disease vaccine in the Sudan. Tropical Animal Health and 
Production, 25: 151-154. 
George, J.B.D., Otobo, S., Ogunleye, J., & Adediminiyi, B.  1993. Louse and mite infestation 
in domestic animals in northern Nigeria. Tropical Animal Health and Production , 25, 121-
124. 
Gunaratne, S.P., Chandrasiri, A.D.N., Hemalatha, W.A.P.M., & Roberts, J.A.  1993. Feed 
resource base for scavenging village chickens in Sri Lanka. Tropical Animal Health and 
Production 26: 249-257. 
Gunaratne, S.P, Chandrasiri, A.D.N., Wickramaratne, S.H.G. & Roberts, J.A.  1994. The 
utilisation of scavenging feed resource base for village chicken production. Proceedings 
Seventh Asian Australasian Association for Animal Production Congress , Bali, Indonesia, 2: 
67-68. 
Guéye, E.F. 1998. Village egg and fowl meat production in Africa. World’s Poultry Science 
Journal 54 (1): 73-86. 
Haaren-Kiso, A., Horst, van, P. & Valle Zarate, A.  1995. Direct and indirect effects of the 
frizzle gene on the productive adaptability of laying hens. Animal Research and 
Development, 42: 98-114. 
Hahn, D.T., Hai L.T., Hung D.S., & Tinh, N.H.  1995. Improving the productivity of local 
Muscovy duck with high yielding exotic Muscovy duck and the initial production 
experiment of Mullard in Vietnam. Proceedings 10 th European Symposium on Waterfowl ,
Halle, Germany. World's Poultry Science Association, 31-39.  
Huque, Q.M.E.  1999. Poultry research in Ba ngladesh: present status and its implication for 
future research. In F. Dolberg and P.H. Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty 
113 Small-scale poultry production
Eradication and Promotion of Gender Equality,  pp.151-164. Proceedings workshop, March 
22-26, 1999, Tune Landboskole, Denmark  
(also available at http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/15-Haque.htm). 
Horst, P. 1989. Native fowl as reservoir for genomes and major genes with direct and indirect 
effect on adaptability and their potential for tropical orientated breeding plans. Arch. 
Geflügelkd. 53: 93-101. 
Horst, P. 1990a. Waterfowl in China. Poultry International , 29(4): 16-20. 
Horst, P. 1990b. Research and development perspectives. Proceedings  International Seminar 
on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production, 9-13 October, 1990, Thessaloniki, Greece, pp. 61-
69. 
Huchzermeyer, F.W.  1973.  Free-ranging hybrid chickens under African tribal conditions. 
Rhodesian Agricultural Journal, 70: 73-75. 
Horst, P., Mathur P.K. & Valle Zarate, A.  1996. Breeding policies for specific tropical 
environments using appropriate  combinations of major genes.  Proceedings XX World 
Poultry Congress, New Delhi, India, 1: 633-640. 
Hutagalung, R.I. 1981. The use of tree crops and their by-products for intensive animal 
production. In A.J.Smith and R.G. Gunn, eds. Intensive animal production in the developing 
countries,. Occasional Publication No. 4. British Society of Animal Production. 151-184 pp. 
Ideris, A., Ibrahim, A. L., & Spradbrow, P. B.  1990. Vaccination of chickens against 
Newcastle disease with a food pellet vaccine. Avian Pathology, 19(2): 371-384. 
Jagne, J., Aini, I., Schat, K. A., Fennell, A., & Touray, O.  1991. Vaccination of village 
chickens in the Gambia against Newcastle disease using the heat-resistant, food-pelleted V4 
vaccine. Avian Pathology, 20(4), 721-724. 
Janviriyasopak, O., Thitisak, W., Thepkraiwan, L., Jongsathien, K., Mekapratheep, M., 
von Kruedner, R. & Morris, R.S.  1989. A health and productivity study of village poultry. 
Proceedings of the International Seminar on Animal Health and Production Services for 
Village Livestock. Khon Kaen Thailand. 161-171. 
Jayawardane, G.W.L., Alwis, M.C.L.D., & Bandara, D.A.W.W.D.A.  1990. Oral vaccination 
of chickens against Newcastle disease with V4 vaccine delivered on processed rice grains .
Australian Veterinary Journal, 67(10): 364-366. 
Jensen, H.A.,  1999 Paradigm and Visions: Netw ork for Poultry Production and Health in 
Developing Countries. In F. Dolberg and P.H. Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty 
Eradication and Promotion of Gender Equality, pp.31-38. Proceedings workshop, March 
22-26, 1999, Tune Landboskole, Denmark (also available at 
 http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/ php/tune99/3-AJensen.htm). 
Kabatange, M.A. & Katule, A.M.  1989. Rural poultry production systems in the United 
Republic of Tanzania. In E. B. Sonaiya, ed. Rural poultry in Africa. Proceedings of an 
International Workshop, Ile-Ife, Nigeria, 13-16 November, 1989: 171-176. 
Katule, A.M. 1991. Performance of local chickens under scavenging and intensive management 
systems. Entwicklung ländlicher raum 5: 26-28. 
Kelly, P. J., Chitauro, D., Rohde, C., Rukwav a, J., Majok, A., Davelaar, F., & Mason, P. 
R. 1994. Diseases and management of backyard chicken flocks in Chitungwiza, Zimbabwe. 
Avian Diseases, 38(3): 626-629. 
Khadijah, E. 1988. University Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 212. (PhD thesis). 
Khalafalla, A ..I. 1994. Isolation and characterization of lentogenic Newcastle disease viruses 
from apparently healthy chickens in the Sudan. Bulletin Animal Health and Production in 
Africa, 42(3): 179-182. 
Khomari, L. 2000 (Chairperson) Final Discussion : Lessons for Future Research and 
Development: how do we use data to develop a rural poultry develo pment programme? In
E.B. Sonaiya, ed. Issues in Family Poultry Development Research. 2000. Proceedings 
Bibliography 114 
International workshop on December 9-13, 1997, M’Bour, Senegal. INFPD, Department of 
Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria (also 
available at http://www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampol/proceed.htm). 
Kim, S.J., & Spradbrow, P.B . 1978. Some properties of lentogenic Australian Newcastle 
disease virus. Veterinary Microbiology, 3: 129-141. 
Kingston, D.J. 1980. The productivity of scavenging chickens in some villages of West Java, 
Indonesia. Proceedings of the South Pacific Poultry Science Convention,  Auckland, New 
Zealand. 228-236. 
Kingston, D.J & Creswell, D.C  1982. Indigenous chickens in Indonesia: population and 
production characteristics in five villages in West Java . Research Institute for Animal 
Production, Bogor, Indonesia, Report No. 2, 3-8. 
Kobling, S. 1989. Abschlußbericht, Station Avicole Dosso, Niger. GTZ. 8 pp. 
Koeslag, G.J . 1992. The role of poultry in the rural areas . Proceedings of the Introductory 
Seminar on Poultry Development Policy , 7-16 September 1992, Barneveld College, 
Barneveld, The Netherlands. 17-23. 
Koster, E. (Ed.)  1996. Poultry Farming Systems for Small Commercial Farmers. Proceedings 
of a Poultry Workshop held at the Animal Improvement Institute, Irene, South Africa.  
Mack, S. 1998. Type and sources of information on family poultry.  INFPD Newsletter 8 (2) 
February - March 1998. From Guidelines for the inclusion of improved household poultry 
production, Special programme for food security (SPFS), May, 1997:13-14. AGA Divisional 
SPFS Focal Point, FAO, Rome. 
Majiyagbe, K.A. & Nawathe, D.R.  1981. Isolation of virulent Newcastle disease virus from 
apparently normal ducks in Nigeria. Vet. Record, 108(9): 190. 
Mathur, P.K. & Horst, P.  1989. Temperature stress and tropical locations as factors for 
genotype x environment interactions in poultry production. Proceedings Genotype and 
environment interactions in poultry production, INRA, Jouy-en-Josas (France): 83-96. 
Matthewman, R.W. 1977. A survey of Small Livestock at the village level in derived Savanna 
and Lowland Forest Zones of South West Nigeria. Study No. 4, University of Reading. 
Mavale, A.P . 1995. Epidemiology and control of Newcastle disease in rural poultry in 
Mozambique. University of Reading, Reading. (MSc thesis).  
Mbugua P.N. 1990. Proceedings Rural Small-holder Poultry Production in Kenya, 2: 119-131. 
McInerney, J . 1992. Economic aspects of disease in poultry production. Proceedings XIX 
World Poultry Congress, 2: 561-566. 
Meulemans, G., Letellier, C., Gonze, M., Carlier, M.C., & Burny, A.  Recombinant vaccinia 
virsu vector protects chickens against live-virus 1988. Newcastle disease virus F 
glycoprotein expressed from a challenge. Avian Pathology, 17: 821-827. 
Mkangare, M.M.J.  1989. Collection of Tanzanian medicinal plants for biological activity 
studies. Paper presented at the 7th Tanzanian Veterinary Association, Dar-es-Salaam, United 
Republic of Tanzania. 
Moerad, B. 1987. Indonesia: Disease Control . In J. W . Copland, ed.  Newcastle Disease in 
Poultry: A New Food Pellet Vaccine.  ACIAR Monograph No. 5: 73-76. 
National Research Council 1984. Nutrient Requirements of Poultry . Subcommittee on Poultry 
Nutrition, National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Nawathe, D. R.  1982. Isolation of poxvirus from an outbreak in turkey poults. Sudan Journal 
of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, 23(2), 140-141. 
Negesse, T. 1991. Survey of internal parasites of local chickens of southern Ethiopia. Indian
Journal of Poultry Science, 26(2): 128-129. 
115 Small-scale poultry production
Nielsen, H. 2000. Food and nutrient intake among females in rural Bangladesh - how does a 
poultry project benefit women and girls?  Research Department of Human Nutrition. The 
Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University. Copenhagen. (MA thesis). 
Nwokolo, E.N., Bragg, D.B. & Saben, H.S . 1977. A nutritive evaluation of palm kernel meal 
for use in poultry rations. Tropical Science 19: 147-154. 
Nwosu, C.C. 1979. Characterization of the local chicken of Nigeria and its potential for egg and 
meat production. Proceedings 1st national Seminar on  Poultry Production in Nigeria , 11-13 
December, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria. National Animal Production Research 
Institute, 187-210. 
Nwude, N. & Ibrahim, M.A.  1980. Plants used in traditional veterinary medical practice in 
Nigeria. J. Vet. Pharmacol. & Therapeutics, 3: 261-273. 
Obi, O.O. & E.B. Sonaiya. 1995. Gross margin analysis of smallholder rural poultry 
production in Osun State. Nig. Journal Anim. Prod., 22: 95-107. 
Odi, H. Diambra.  1990. State of smallholder rura l poultry production in Cote d'Ivoire. 
Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production, 9-13 October, 
1990, Thessaloniki, Greece, pp.105-116. 
Oh, B.T . 1987. Malaysia: Economic importance .I n  J.W.Copland, ed. Newcastle Disease in 
Poultry - A New Food Pellet Vaccine, ACIAR Monograph No. 5: 83-85.  
Ojeniyi, A. 1984. Salmonella hirschfeldi in poultry and humans in Ibadan, Nigeria. Bulletin of 
the World Health Organization, 62(5), 773-775. 
Ojeniyi, A. A . 1985. Comparative bacterial drug resistance in modern battery and free-range 
poultry in a tropical environment. Vet. Record, 117(1), 11-12. 
Olawoye, J.E. & D.C. di Domenico , 1990. Socio-cultural factors related to livestock 
production in southern Nigeria . Paper presented at the National  conference on Nigerian 
livestock industry and prospects for the 1990s,  19-22, November, 1990, Kaduna, Nigeria. 
NISER, 18 pp. 
Olori, V. E. & E. B. Sonaiya.  1992a. Composition and shell quality of white and brown eggs 
of the Nigeria Indigenous chicken. Nig. Journal Anim. Prod., 19:12-14. 
Olori, V. E. & E. B. Sonaiya.  1992b. Effect of length of lay of  Nigeria Indigenous chickens on 
their egg composition and shell quality. Nig. Journal Anim. Prod. 19:95-100. 
Oluyemi, J.A.  1979. Potentials of the indigenous species of poultry for meat and egg 
production in Nigeria. pp.163-186. Proceedings 1st National Seminar on Poultry Production 
in Nigeria, 11-13 December, 1979. Ahmadu Be llo University, Zaria, Nigeria. National 
Animal Production Research Institute. 
Oluyemi, J.A. & Roberts F.A.  1988. Manure parameters: poultry production in warm wet 
climates, p.113. London, Macmillan. 
Omeje, S.S.I. & Nwosu, C.C.  1986 . 3rd World Congress: Genet. Appl. Livest. Prod ., 
Nebraska. X: 304-310. 
Onwudike, O.C. 1986. Palm kernel as a feed for poultry . Animal Feed Science and Technology
16: 179-202. 
Ouandaogo, Z.C . 1990. Programme de développement des animaux villageois (PDAV), 
Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production, 9-13 October, 
1990, Thessaloniki, Greece, (2): 27-36. 
Prasetyo, T., Subiharta, W.D., & Sabrani, M. 1985. The effect of chick and hen separation on 
village chicken egg productivity . 1984/1985 Research Report, p.22. Research Institute for 
Animal Production, Indonesia. 
Prawirokusumo, S.  1988. Problems to improve small scale native chickens management in 
south-east asian countries. Proceedings XVIII World's Poultry Congress, Japan, 113-116. 
Ramm G., Balzer, G., Eckert, M. v., Hugo, R., Massler, B., Müller, R., & Richter, J . 1984. 
Animal Husbandry in East Kalimantan: integration of animal husbandry into transmigrant 
Bibliography 116 
farming systems in the middle Mahakam area in East Kalimantan , Indonesia .Fachbereich 
Internationale Agraentwicklung, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Publication No.84, 4-
5. 
Ratanasethakul, C. 1988. Study of Newcastle disease vaccination one to four times a year in 
native chickens raised in the village. Thai Journal of Vet. Medicine, 18(1): 3-7. 
Rauen, H.W, de los Santos, M. & Fabian, P.  1990. Actual situation of the small scale poultry 
production in rural areas in the Dominican Republic and improving perspectives for the 
future. Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry Production , 9-13 
October, 1990, Thessaloniki, Greece,.  
Roberts, J.A., 1999. Utilisation of Poultry Feed Resources by Smallholders in the Villages of 
Developing Countries . In  F. Dolberg & P.H. Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty 
Eradication and Promotion of Gender Equality,  pp. 311-336. Proceedings workshop, March 
22-26, 1999, Tune Landboskole, Denmark.  
(available at http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/28-roberts.htm). 
Roberts, J.A., Gunaratne, S.P., Wickra maratne, S.H.G & Chandrasiri, A.D.N.  1994. 
Proceedings of the Seventh Asian-Australasian Association for Animal Production Congress,
Bali, Indonesia, 2: 34-35. 
Roberts, J.A. & Senaratne, R.  1992. The successful introduction of hybrid egg laying 
chickens into a Sri Lankan village. Proceedings 19th World Poultry Congress, Amsterdam, 1: 
818-821. 
Sa'idu, L., Abdu, P.A., Umoh, J.U. & Abdullahi, U.S. 1994. Diseases of Nigerian indigenous 
chickens. Bulletin Animal Health and Production in Africa, 42(1): 19-23. 
Sagild, I.K. & Haresnape, J.M.  1987. The status of Newcastle disease and the use of V4 
vaccine in Malawi. Avian Pathology, 16(1): 165-176. 
Sagild, I.K. & Spalatin, J.  1982. Newcastle disease vaccination with the V4 strain in Malawi. 
Laboratory and field studies. Avian Diseases, 26: 625. 
Salatin, J. 1993. Pastured Poultry Profits. Swoope, Virginia, Polyface Inc.  
Saleque, M.A.  1999. Scaling-up: Critical factors in leadership, ma nagement, human resource 
development and institution-building in going from pilot project to large-scale 
implementation: The BRAC poultry model in Bangladesh. In F. Dolberg & P.H. Petersen, 
eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty Eradication and Promotion of Gender Equality,  pp. 51-71. 
Proceedings workshop, March 22-2 6, 1999, Tune Landboskole, Denmark (also available at 
http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/5-Saleque.htm). 
Sall, B.  1990. Contribution a l´etude des possibilites d´amelioration de la production en 
aviculture traditionnelle: mesure du potentiel de la race locale et des produits d´un 
croisement ameliorateur . Institut National de Developpement Rural, St. Louis, Senegal. P. 
32 (MSc thesis). 
Samson, A.C.R. 1988. Virus structure. In: D. J. Alexander, ed. Newcastle Disease, pp. 23-44. 
Kluger Academic Publishers, London. 
Samuel, J.L., Bensink, Z., & Spradbrow, P.B. 1993. Oral vaccination of chickens with the V4 
strain of Newcastle disease virus: Cooked and raw white rice as a vehicle. Tropical Animal 
Health and Production, 25: 3-10. 
Samuel, J.L. & Spradbrow, P.B. 1989. Persistence of the V4 strain of Newcastle disease virus 
in open-range flock of chickens. Vet. Records, 124: 193-196. 
Sani, R.A., Harisah, M., Ideris, A. & Shah-Majid, M . 1987. Malaysia: Fowl diseases. In: J. 
W. Copland, ed. Newcastle disease in poultry: a new food pellet vaccine .  ACIAR 
Monograph No. 5: 89-92. 
Saunders, M.J. 1984. La trichose de la pintade en Haute-Volta: une protozoose meutriere et 
meconnue. Projet de Développement de l’Aviculture Villageoise, Ministère du 
Développement Rural, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
117 Small-scale poultry production
Sazzad, M.H, Ebadul, M.H. & Asaduzzaman, M.U.  1990. Egg production by desi 
(indigenous) hens in rural Bangladesh. Tropical Animal Health and Production 22:22. 
Setioko, A.R.  1997 Recent study on traditional system of duck layer flock management in 
Indonesia. Proceedings 11th European Symposium on Waterfowl,  8-10 September, 1997, 
Nantes (France), 491-498. 
Sharma, R.N., Hussein, N.A., Pandey, G.S. & Shandomo, M.N . 1984 A study on Newcastle 
disease outbreaks in Zambia, 1975-1984 . Revue Scientifique et Technique, Office 
International des Epizooties, 5(1): 5-14. 
Shingari, B.K., Sapra, K.L. & Mehta, R.K.  1994. Guinea fowl in the Punjab. Poultry
International, 33(7): 54. 
Siddiqui, S., Tarik, N., Bina, S.S. & Shaheen, F. 1986. Isolation of a triterpenoid from 
Azadirachta indica. Phytochemistry 25(9): 2183-2186. 
Simmons, G.C. 1967. The isolation of Newcastle disease in Queensland. Australian  Veterinary 
Journal, 43: 29. 
Smith, A.J. 1990. Poultry-Tropical Agriculturist Series, pp.179-184.CTA, Macmillan, London. 
Smith, O.B., Ilori, J.O. & Onesirosan, P.  1984. The proximate composition and nutritive 
value of the winged bean Phosphocarpus tetragonolobus (L) DC for broilers. Animal Feed 
Science & Tech. 11: 231-237. 
Sonaiya, E.B.  1989. Animal by-products and their potential for commercial livestock feed 
production. In:  G.M. Babatunde, ed. Proceedings National Workshop on Alternative 
Formulations of Livestock Feeds in Nigeria . ARMTI, 21-15 November, 1988, Ilorin, 
Nigeria, Economic Affairs Office, The Presidency, 298-315. 
Sonaiya, E.B. 1990a. The context and prospects for development of smallholder rural poultry 
production in Africa. Proceedings International Seminar on Smallholder Rural Poultry 
Production, 9-13 October, 1990, Thessaloniki, Greece,  1: 35-52.  
Sonaiya, E.B.  1990b, ANRPD Proceedings International Network for Family Poultry 
Development (INFPD): origins, activities, objectives and visions. In F. Dolberg & P.H. 
Petersen, eds. Poultry as a Tool in Poverty Eradication and Promotion of Gender Equality,
pp.39-50. Proceedings Workshop, March 22-26, 1999, Tune Landboskole, Denmar (also 
available at http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/4-Sonaiya.htm). 
Sonaiya, E.B. 1990c. Poultry husbandry in small rural farms.Entwicklung + ländlicher raum 4:
3-6. 
Sonaiya, E.B.  1992. The Guinea fowl: the status of knowledge in the arid to the sub-humid 
zones of West Africa. Paper presented to the FAO workshop on Guinea fowl Development in 
African Dry Areas, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. October 18-24, 1992 
Sonaiya, E.B.  1993. Evaluation of non-conventional feed ingredients as supplements for 
scavenging chicken. Proceedings VII World Conference on Animal Production,  1993, 
Edmonton, Alberta, 28-29. 
Sonaiya, E.B. 1995. Feed resources for smallholder poultry in Nigeria . World Animal Review, 
82 (1): 25-33. 
Sonaiya, E.B. 2000. Issues in Family Poultry Development Research. Proceedings International 
workshop Dec. 9-13, 1997 at M’Bour, Senegal. INFPD, pp. 204. Ile-Ife, Nigeria, Dept. Animal 
Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Ob afemi Awolowo University. (Also available at 
http://www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampo1/fampo.htm). 
Sonaiya, E.B. Branckaert, R.D.S. & Guèye, E.F. 1999. Research and development options for 
family poultry. Introductory paper to the First INFPD/FAO electronic conference on family 
poultry, December 1998 to July 1999 (also available at 
http://www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampo1/fampo/Intropap.htm). 
Sonaiya, E.B. & Omole, T.A . 1977. Cassava peels for finishing pigs. Nutrition Reports 
International 16(4): 479-486. 
Bibliography 118 
Soukossi, A.  1992. Maggot production for fish and poultry production. ANRPD Newsletter
3(2): 6. 
Spradbrow, P.B. 1993/94. Newcastle disease in village chickens. Poultry Science Review, 5(2): 
57-96. 
Ssenyonga, G. S. 1982. Prevalence of helminth parasites of domestic fowl ( Gallus domesticus)
in Uganda. Tropical Animal Health and Production 14:201-204.  
Sugrim, A.M. 1987. Role of livestock in socio-economic development of small farmers in the 
Pacific Island countries. Asian Livestock (October 1987): 127-131. 
Suleiman, H. 1990. An address to the International workshop on Rural Poultry Development. 
In: E .  B .  S o n a i y a ,  e d .  Rural Poultry in Africa. Proceedings International Workshop ,13-16 
November, 1989, Ile-Ife, Nigeria, Afri can Network on Rural Poultry Development 
(ANRPD), 7-8. 
Supramaniam, P . 1988. Economic importance of Newcastle disease vaccine to the village 
poultry industry in Malaysia. Proceedings Second Asian/Pacific Poultry Health Conference ,
13-25 September, 1988, Surfers’ Paradise, Australia,: 511-516. 
Tadelle, D., Alemu, Y. & Peters, K.J.  2000.  Indigenous chickens in Ethiopia: genetic 
potential and attempts at improvement. World Poultry Science Journal, 56(1): 45- 54. 
Tantaswasdi, U., Danvivatanaporn, J., Siriwan, P., Chaisingh, A. & Spradbrow, P.B. 1992. 
Evaluation of an oral Newcastle disease vaccine in Thailand. Prev. Vet. Medicine, 12, 87-. 
ter Horst, K.  1986. Poultry Management in rural areas of developing countries: Matching 
technical demands with social facts.  Unpublished report, Department of Livestock Services, 
Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries, Bangladesh. 
ter Horst, K. 1987 Some remarks on poultry improvement in Bang ladesh as related to socio-
economic factors.  Paper presented to the FAO Expert Consultation on Rural Poultry 
Development in Asia, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
The Bin, N.  1996. Economic efficiency of duck raising in the Mekong River Delta, In W.J. 
Pryor, ed. ACIAR Proceedings, ACIAR Monograph No. 68: 138-145. 
Thitisak, W.  1992. Untersuchungen über die Häufigkeit und Ursachen der Abgänge bei der 
kleinbäuerlichen Geflügelhaltung in Nordosten Thailands.  Unpublished Dr Med. Vet., 
Tierärtzlichen Hochschule Hannover, Hannover. 84p. 
Thitisak, W., Janviriyasopak, O., Morris, R.S., Srihakim, S. & Kruedener, R. V.  1989. 
Causes of death found in an epidemiological study of native chickens in Thai villages . Acta 
Veterinaria Scandinavia, 84 (Suppl.): 200-202. 
Tucker, S. 1989. Alternatives, ADAS Poultry Journal 3(1): 15-30. 
Udedibie, A.B.I.  1991. Relative effects of h eat and urea-treated jackbean ( Canavalia 
ensiformis) and swordbean ( Canavalia gladiata ) on the performance of laying hens. 
Livestock Research for Rural Development, 3(3): 68-76. 
Udo, H. 1992. Are free range poultry relevant? N-CT-R Livestock Newsletter 5(2): 2. 
van Veluw, K . 1987. Traditional poultry keeping in Northern Ghana. ILEIA, December 1987, 
3(4): 12-13. 
Verger, M. 1986. La prophylaxie de la maladie de Newcastle dans les élevages villageois en 
Afrique. L´aviculteur, 465: 44-48. 
Vorster, A., Adjovi, A., Demey, F.  1992. Protéines dans les aliments des poules–l’utilisation 
d’Eudrilus eugeniae et Eisenia fetida dans des conditions tropicales. Bulletin du 
RADAR.,2(1):3. 
Watt, J.M. & Breyer-Brandwijk, M.G.  1962 . The Medicinal and Poisonous Plants of 
Southern and Eastern Africa. E & S Livingstone Ltd, Edinburgh and London.  
Wibberley, G. 1994. Monitoring of highly virulent infectio us bursal disease in Botswana 1989 
to 1993. Tropical Animal Health and Production, 26(3): 161-162. 
119 Small-scale poultry production
Wickramaratne, S.H.G., Gunaratne, S.P., Chandrasiri, A.D.N. & Roberts, J.A.  1994. 
Chick mortality in scavenging village chickens in Sri Lanka. Proceedings of the Asian-
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Animal Production,  Bali, Indonesia, 2: 71-
72. 
Young, J.R. 1987. Training of Community Animal First Aid Workers. ILEIA, December, 3(4): 
14-15. 
Young, P. 1991. The use of heat resistant V4 Newcastle disease vaccine in Asia. In: F. Demey 
& V. S. Pandey, eds. Newcastle disease vaccination of village poultry in Africa and Asia .
Proceedings seminar, Antwerp, Belgium, Feb.13-14, 1991, 19-27. 
Zoungrana, B. & Slenders, G.,  1993. Poultry in the Backyard in Burkina Faso. ILEIA, 18(3): 
17. 
5IJTUFDIOJDBMHVJEFQSPNPUFTTVTUBJOBCMFTNBMMTDBMFGBNJMZC BTFEQPVMUSZQSPEVDUJPO*U
HJWFTBDPNQSFIFOTJWFSFWJFXPGBMMBTQFDUTPGTNBMMTDBMFQPVMUSZQSPEVDUJPOJOEFWFMPQJOH
DPVOUSJFTBOEJODMVEFTTFDUJPOTPOGFFEJOHBOEOVUSJUJPOIPVTJ OHHFOFSBMIVTCBOESZBOE
nPDL IFBMUI 3FHJPOBM EJGGFSFODFT JO QSPEVDUJPO QSBDUJDFT BSF BMTP EFTDSJCFE 5IF HVJEF
QSPWJEFT UIF UFDIOJDBM BOE TDJFOUJmD iCVJMEJOH CMPDLTw OFFEFE U P EFWFMPQ TVTUBJOBCMF
QSPHSBNNFTGPSTNBMMTDBMFQPVMUSZQSPEVDUJPO*UXJMMCFPGQSBDUJDBMWBMVFUPUIPTFLFFQJOH
PS QMBOOJOH UP LFFQ QPVMUSZ BOE BT B WBMVBCMF UFDIOJDBM SFGFSFODF GPS QPVMUSZ TQFDJBMJTUT
SFTFBSDIFSTTUVEFOUTBOEUIPTFJOUFSFTUFEJOCSPBEFSSVSBMEFWFMPQNFOUJTTVFT
           
7&0<(
,6%1 ,661