# Improving Village Chicken Production: A Manual for Field Workers and Trainers
# publisher: FAO / ACIAR
# year: unknown
# url: https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/2abd5aaf-c298-4f71-966c-e1fcf6f9432a/content
# attribution: Improving Village Chicken Production: A Manual for Field Workers and Trainers
# ghana_specific: False
# extent: 198 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

village chicken production: 
a manual for field workers and trainers

Christine Ahlers, Robyn Alders, Brigitte Bagnol,  
Ana Bela Cambaza, Mohamed Harun, Richard Mgomezulu,  
Halifa Msami, Bob Pym, Peter Wegener, Ed Wethli  
and Mary Young
2009
village chicken production: 
a manual for field workers and trainers
The Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR) 
was established in June 1982 by an Act of the Australian Parliament. 
ACIAR operates as part of Australia’s international development 
cooperation program, with a mission to achieve more productive 
and sustainable agricultural systems, for the benefit of developing 
countries and Australia. It commissions collaborative research between 
Australian and developing-country researchers in areas where Australia 
has special research competence. It also administers Australia’s 
contribution to the International Agricultural Research Centres.
Where trade names are used this constitutes neither endorsement  
of nor discrimination against any product by the Centre.
ACIAR MONOGRAPH SERIES
This series contains the results of original research supported 
by ACIAR, or material deemed relevant to ACIAR’s research 
and development objectives. The series is distributed 
internationally, with an emphasis on developing countries.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2009
This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under  
the Copyright Act 1968, no part may be reproduced by any  
process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. 
Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights should  
be addressed to the Commonwealth Copyright Administration, 
Attorney-General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National  
Circuit, Barton ACT 2600 or posted at  
<http://www.ag.gov.au/cca>.
Published by the Australian Centre for  
International Agricultural Research (ACIAR)
GPO Box 1571, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia
Telephone: 61 2 6217 0500
aciar@aciar.gov.au
Ahlers C., Alders R.G., Bagnol B., Cambaza A.B., Harun M., 
Mgomezulu R., Msami H., Pym B., Wegener P ., Wethli E.  
and Young M. 2009. Improving village chicken production:  
a manual for field workers and trainers. ACIAR Monograph  
No. 139. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research: 
Canberra, 194 pp.
ISBN 978 1 921531 57 6 (print)
ISBN 978 1 921531 58 3 (online)
Technical editing by Clarus Design Pty Ltd
Design by WhiteFox
Printing by Goanna Print
3
Foreword
Poultry have contributed to human health and wellbeing for millennia. For rural 
communities, poultry continue to be an integral part of farming systems and 
household economies. For cities and towns, where an increasing proportion 
of people now live, large- and small-scale commercial poultry industries play 
a critical role in providing safe, good-quality products for urban consumers. 
In many countries, commercial and household poultry are located within the 
same communities, and improvement programs designed to increase the 
capacity of producers and introduce new technologies and practices can  
have widespread impact. 
Australia has supported the implementation of effective village chicken 
production programs in Asia, Africa and Latin America, including several 
research projects funded by the Australian Centre for International Agricultural 
Research (ACIAR). This investment in research and development, always 
in collaboration with producers, traders and other stakeholders, has been 
shown to increase poultry numbers, household purchasing power, home 
consumption of chicken products (resulting in improved nutrition for families) 
and the decision-making power of women. Village chicken improvement 
programs have the potential to contribute to each of the Millennium 
Development Goals and to do so for the most vulnerable families in 
developing countries.
This is the fourth manual on improvements to village chicken production 
supported by ACIAR.
1 These manuals aim to fill gaps in the training literature, 
which has dealt mostly with intensive commercial production or backyard 
production in developed countries. This manual is focused on developing 
countries and describes husbandry practices and biosecurity measures for 
village chickens that can be implemented using locally available resources. 
These measures will lead to both increased productivity and improved 
protection from disease in village chicken systems. 
The manual is comprehensive, covering many aspects of production and 
health. It draws on the research results of a number of ACIAR-funded  
projects that provided a sustainable base to the control of Newcastle disease 
(ND) in village chickens using thermotolerant vaccine. Newcastle disease 
remains a major constraint to poultry production worldwide and these projects 
recognised that benefits to farmers can be further increased when other  
health and production issues are tackled in addition to vaccination.
Much of the content of the manual has been developed to this final 
stage during a project funded by the Australian Agency for International 
Development (AusAID) from 2002 to 2005, to implement the Southern Africa 
Newcastle Disease Control Project (SANDCP) in Malawi, Mozambique and 
1	 Controlling	Newcastle	disease	in	village	chickens:	field	(Alders	and	Spreadbrow	2001),	training	(Alders	et	al.	2002)	
and	laboratory	(Y oung	at	al.	2002)	manuals	(ACIAR	Monographs	82,	86	and	87,	respectively)
4
Tanzania. SANDCP followed on from 7 years of ACIAR-funded research on 
ND control conducted by the Mozambican National Institute for Veterinary 
Research and the University of Queensland. 
It is pleasing to note that the success of SANDCP , including the use of the 
training material in this manual, has gone well beyond the control of ND in 
these three countries and has laid a foundation for responding effectively 
to the worldwide epidemic of highly pathogenic avian influenza and in 
developing livelihood strategies for communities affected by high levels  
of HIV/AIDS.
ACIAR will continue to support research that contributes to food security,  
food safety and ecologically sustainable livestock production, and to 
recognise that building capacity in poultry health and production is of  
special significance to developing countries. 
 
 
Peter Core 
Chief Executive Officer 
ACIAR
5
Contents
FOREwORd   3
AbOut tHE AutHORS 8
ACkNOwlEdGMENtS 10
AbbREvIAtIONS  11
GlOSSARy   12
PARt 1 vIllAGE CHICkENS ANd vIllAGE CHICkEN FARMERS 15
1  Introduction 16
1.1 Village chickens defined 16
1.2 About this manual 17
1.3 How to use this manual 18
1.4 Promoting improved village chicken production using minimal  
external inputs 19
1.5  Gender and village chickens 22
1.6  Newcastle disease and avian influenza control, and other  
production improvements 22
1.7  Village chicken production and HIV/AIDS mitigation 23
1.8  Organic village chicken production 23
1.9  Village chicken production and wildlife conservation 23
2  General information about village chicken production 25
2.1 The village chicken system 25
2.2  Comparisons between village chickens and commercial  
chicken production 26
2.3  Production characteristics of village chickens 27
2.4  The scavenging feed resource base 29
3  w orking together with male and female village chicken producers 30
3.1  Introduction 30
3.2  Phase 1: Raising awareness and identifying problems 31
3.3  Phase 2: Identifying solutions and planning activities 32
3.4  Phase 3: Implementing activities 33
3.5  Phase 4: Evaluating the results 33
PARt 2 HOuSING, NutRItION ANd MANAGEMENt 35
4  Chicken housing and shelter 36
4.1  Introduction 36
4.2  Types of housing 36
4.3  Constructing a chicken house 38
4.4  Roosts/perches 38
4.5  Maintaining a chicken house 39
4.6  Provision of nests 39
4.7  Protection from predators and theft 41
6
5  Nutrition 43
5.1  Water  43
5.2  Scavenging 44
5.3  How a chicken digests food 45
5.4  What chickens need in their feed 46
5.5  Feed resources 48
5.6  Supplementary feeding 50
5.7  Feedstuffs that might be offered to chickens, and their nutrient content 54
5.8  Feeding confined chickens 54
6  Flock management 57
6.1  Keeping the flock healthy and productive 57
6.2  Flock size 58
6.3  General hygiene 59
6.4  Laying, brooding and hatching 60
6.5  Raising young chicks 68
6.6  Breeding 72
6.7  Meat production (sale and consumption) 75
6.8  Egg production (sale and consumption) 80
6.9  Record keeping 88
7  disorders related to poor husbandry or nutrition 89
PARt 3 dISEASES ANd tHEIR CONtROl 91
8  disease in village chickens 92
8.1  Introduction 92
8.2  Causes of disease 92
8.3  Transmission of infectious diseases 93
8.4  Notifiable diseases 94
8.5  Diagnosis of poultry disease 94
9  disease control 102
9.1  Introduction 102
9.2  Tools used to control diseases in village chickens 102
9.3  How to prevent a disease from entering a village chicken flock 104
9.4  How to control a disease outbreak in a village chicken flock 106
10  Newcastle disease 108
10.1  Cause and impact 108
10.2  Transmission 108
10.3  Species affected 110
10.4  Clinical signs 110
10.5  Post-mortem findings 112
10.6  Field diagnosis of Newcastle disease 112
10.7  Investigating vaccination failure 113
10.8  Controlling Newcastle disease 114
10.9  Reporting Newcastle disease 119
10.10  Differential diagnosis of Newcastle disease in village chickens 119
Improving village chicken production: a manual for field workers and trainers
7
11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens 121
11.1  Introduction 121
11.2  Avian influenza (fowl plague) 123
11.3  Chronic respiratory disease 130
11.4  Coccidiosis 131
11.5  Colisepticaemia 132
11.6  External parasites (fleas, mites etc.) 133
11.7  Fowl cholera (pasteurellosis) 137
11.8  Fowl pox 139
11.9  Fowl typhoid 140
11.10  Infectious bursal disease/Gumboro disease  141
11.11  Infectious bronchitis 143
11.12  Infectious coryza 144
11.13  Infectious laryngotracheitis 145
11.14 Marek’s disease 146
11.15  Pullorum disease (bacillary white diarrhoea) 147
11.16 Internal parasites 148
12  Concluding remarks 150
bIblIOGRAPHy  151
APPENdIxES  155
1 How to use this manual as part of a training course for livestock officers, 
extension agents, community animal health workers or farmers 156
2  Participatory community exercises for identifying problems  
associated with village chicken production 157
3  Collection of blood samples 173
4  Post-mortem examination 175
5  Collection of samples for laboratory examination 183
6  Sources of further information 194
Contents
8
About the authors
Author Description Contact details
Christine Ahlers A poultry veterinarian with 
experience in both commercial and 
family poultry, working for the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations in its Regional 
Office for Asia and the Pacific
1. FAO Regional Office for Asia and 
the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, 
Bangkok 10200, Thailand
2. Soomskamp 12, 27324  
Eystrup, Germany
 Email: c-ahlers@gmx.de
Robyn Alders A village poultry specialist with the 
International Rural Poultry Centre 
of the KYEEMA Foundation and the 
Cummings School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Tufts University, USA
1. KYEEMA Foundation, GPO Box 
3023, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, 
Australia.
2. International Program, DEPH, 
Cummings School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Tufts University, 200 
Westboro Road, North Grafton  
MA  01536, USA
 Email: robyn.alders@gmail.com
Brigitte Bagnol Social anthropologist with the 
University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa and 
the International Rural Poultry 
Centre of the KYEEMA Foundation
Postnet suite 118 Private Box X1,  
Melrose Arch, 2076 Johannesburg, 
South Africa
Email: bagnolbrigitte@gmail.com
Ana Bela Cambaza A veterinarian working for the 
National Veterinary Services 
Directorate who has been involved 
with the control of Newcastle 
disease in village chickens  
since 2004.
CP 1406, Maputo, Mozambique 
Email: controlodn@yahoo.com.br
Mohamed Harun Veterinary physiologist specialising 
in the biology of incubation and 
temperature regulation in neonates 
of avian species
Veterinary Faculty, University of 
Eduardo Mondlane, PO Box 257, 
Maputo, Mozambique
Email: kabil.harun@tvcabo.co.mz
Richard 
Mgomezulu
Animal production specialist with 
18 years’ experience in livestock 
production including poultry. 
He has been actively involved 
in control of Newcastle disease 
in village chickens using a 
thermotolerant I-2 ND vaccine  
since 2003.
Department of Animal Health and 
Livestock Development, PO Box 
2096, Lilongwe, Malawi
Email: richardag_mgomezulu@
yahoo.co.uk
Halifa Msami Principal veterinary research officer, 
Tanzania national coordinator for 
Newcastle disease control; poultry 
pathologist with several years 
experience working on village 
chicken development
Central Veterinary Laboratory, PO 
Box 9254, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
Email: hmmsami@gmail.com
Improving village chicken production: a manual for field workers and trainers
9
Author Description Contact details
Bob Pym A poultry geneticist by training  
with interest and involvement 
in small-scale family poultry 
production in the developing 
countries of South-East Asia and 
Southern Africa
School of Veterinary Science, 
University of Queensland, St Lucia, 
Queensland 4072, Australia
Email: r.pym@uq.edu.au
Peter Wegener A community development and 
extension specialist who has also 
helped design training materials 
and programs for the control 
of Newcastle disease in village 
chickens 
School of Natural and Rural Systems 
Management,
University of Queensland,
St Lucia Campus, Queensland 4072, 
Australia
Email: p.wegener@uq.edu.au
Ed Wethli A poultry specialist with many 
years’ experience of small-scale 
chicken development in rural and 
peri-urban areas
PO Box 171, Ifafa Beach 4185, 
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
Email: edwethli@absamail.co.za
Mary Young A veterinary pathologist with 
several years’ experience in control 
of Newcastle disease in village 
poultry using thermotolerant I-2 
Newcastle disease vaccine
KYEEMA Foundation, GPO Box 
3023, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, 
Australia
Email: mary_p_young@yahoo.com
About the authors
10
Acknowledgments
Sincere thanks to go to the many farmers, extension workers, livestock 
specialists and veterinarians who have contributed valuable information  
and provided feedback on the contents of this manual.
We acknowledge the support of the Australian Agency for International 
Development through the Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control  
Project (SANDCP) and the Australian Centre for International Agricultural 
Research in the preparation of this manual. Dr Ed Wethli was working as  
an International Fund for Agricultural Development consultant at the time  
his contribution was made. SANDCP was implemented by GRM International 
Pty Ltd in collaboration with the International Rural Poultry Centre of the 
KYEEMA Foundation.
Special thanks go to Mr Razac Chame for his patience and artistic excellence 
in providing all of the illustrations for this manual.
Improving village chicken production: a manual for field workers and trainers
11
Abbreviations
ACIAR Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
AIDS acquired immune deficiency syndrome
CRD chronic respiratory disease
°C  degrees Celsius
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FGD focus group discussion
g grams
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HPAI highly pathogenic avian influenza
IB infectious bronchitis
IBD infectious bursal disease, also known as Gumboro disease
kg kilogram
L litre
m metre
m2 square metre
mL millilitre
ND Newcastle disease 
NGO non-government organisation
PRA participatory rural appraisal
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health (Organisation 
Internationale des Epizooties) 
PPE personal protective equipment
SFRB scavenging feed resource base
12
 Improving village chicken production: a manual for field workers and trainers
Glossary 
Antibody   A protein produced by specialised B cells after stimulation 
by an antigen. Antibodies bind with antigens on foreign 
organisms to help inactivate them. Each antibody can bind 
to only one specific antigen.
Biosecurity Any practice or system that prevents the spread of 
infectious agents from infected to susceptible animals, 
or prevents the introduction of infected animals into 
a herd, region, or country in which the infection 
has not yet occurred. More specifically, biosecurity 
combines ‘bioexclusion’, i.e. measures for preventing a 
pathogen from being introduced into a herd/flock, and 
‘biocontainment’, stopping the spread of a pathogen 
among animal groups within a farm or of being released 
from the farm.
Broody If a hen (= female chicken) is broody, she is ready to  
lay eggs and sit on them.
Cloaca The internal cavity into which the intestinal, urinary and 
genital canals empty in birds. In females it also serves  
as the depository for sperm. The cloaca has an opening 
(vent) for expelling its contents from the body. 
Cockerel A young male chicken.
Droppings The excrement (i.e. manure) produced by animals  
and birds.
Embryo An animal that is developing, either in its mother’s womb  
or in an egg, or a plant that is developing in a seed.
Endemic An endemic disease or condition is one that is regularly 
found and very common among a particular group or in  
a particular area.
Fomites Inanimate objects such as boots, clothing, equipment, 
instruments, vaccination needles, vehicles, crates or 
packaging that can transmit an infectious agent to a  
new host mechanically. Fomites become contaminated  
but not infected.
Forage Food grown for livestock consumption.
Gleanings Cereal remnants in the field after harvesting.
Genotype The particular type and arrangement of genes in an 
organism.
I-2 vaccine Thermotolerant, live, avirulent Newcastle disease vaccine.
13
Lipid A substance such as a fat, oil or wax that dissolves  
in alcohol but not in water and is an important part of  
living cells.
Mechanical The transfer of an infection from one animal to a new host 
transmission  where the transmitter is not infected, in that tissues are  
 not invaded and the agent does not multiply. Fomites are  
 often involved in mechanical transmission.
Mutation A sudden change from the parent type in one or more 
heritable characteristics, caused by a change in a gene  
or a chromosome.
Organic Organic produce, such as plants and animals grown for 
food, is produce grown without the use of insecticides  
and other synthetic chemicals. 
Pathognomonic A pathognomonic sign is a specific sign whose presence 
means, beyond any doubt, that a particular disease is 
present.
Pullet A young, female domestic fowl, especially a chicken,  
from the time she begins to lay until first moult.
Rales 
A clicking, rattling, or crackling noise heard during inhalation.
Reassortment The fragmentation and reassembly of the genetic material 
of two similar viruses that are infecting the same cell.
Rooster An adult male chicken.
Snick A high-pitched sound associated with sneezing in poultry.
Thermolabile A thermolabile agent loses activity (especially infectivity)  
at elevated temperatures.
Thermotolerant A thermotolerant agent retains activity (especially infectivity) 
at elevated temperatures.
Tropism A preference for a particular location or direction. The  
site preferred by a virus (e.g. ND virus) for replication  
within the body.
Vent The external opening of the cloaca, through which eggs 
and droppings pass.
Vertical Passage of a disease-causing agent (a pathogen) vertically  
transmission from mother directly to her offspring during pregnancy or  
 lactation. In the case of poultry, the transmission is from  
 the hen to her chick via the egg.
Virulence Refers to the degree of pathogenicity of a microbe  
or, in other words, the relative ability of a microbe  
to cause disease.
Glossary

15
PART 1
Village chickens and village chicken farmers
The improvement of village chicken production can have a profound effect  
on the wellbeing of rural families. The effective, low-cost interventions 
described in this manual can directly contribute to poverty alleviation, 
household food security, income generation, HIV/AIDS mitigation and 
wildlife conservation. Working with male and female farmers to improve the 
production of their village chickens also provides opportunities to enhance 
their understanding of nutrition, stock management, and the origins and 
development of diseases.
•	 Farmers’ knowledge of poultry and human nutrition can be increased in 
parallel. Since women are often the family members responsible for both 
the care of poultry and the preparation of the family’s meals, this approach 
can bring big benefits.
•	 Once the production of village chickens improves, farmers take a greater 
interest in managing their stocks of birds by monitoring the availability of 
local feed resources and assessing options for the off-take of birds by sale 
or other means.
•	 Ensuring that farmers understand disease processes is an essential step 
as it is very difficult to improve biosecurity practices if they do not believe 
that diseases are caused by infectious agents.
Before promoting improved management and disease control in an area or 
village, it is important to understand the existing environment in which village 
chickens are produced. Part 1 of this manual therefore provides, in three 
chapters, background material on the role of village chickens and where 
they fit into the rural production system. It also describes how to involve the 
community in any activities relating to village chicken production. It should  
be read and understood before deciding on implementing any of the 
interventions described in Parts 2 and 3.
A number of terms that may be unfamiliar are defined in the glossary at the 
beginning of the manual.
16 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
1 Introduction
1.1 Village chickens defined 
Village chickens are the most common type of livestock in many rural areas. 
Even very poor households with few labour resources will normally keep some 
chickens. ‘Village’ chickens are also known as rural, indigenous, scavenging, 
traditional or family chickens, and have various names in local languages. 
There are several definitions of village, rural or family poultry. The main 
differences between them relate to the degree to which aspects of more 
intensive and commercial chicken production systems are included. For the 
purposes of this manual, family poultry is used as a more general category 
that also includes production systems more commonly found in urban 
areas, where a family raises chickens in an enclosure with a greater level 
of purchased inputs. The term village poultry, on the other hand, refers to 
the extensive production systems most commonly found in rural areas, and 
usually involves indigenous chicken genotypes. The information provided in 
this manual is directed toward improvements to village poultry systems and 
aims to maintain the basic advantages of this system, which are low inputs 
and, consequently, low risk. Although the emphasis is on village chickens, 
many of the recommendations in this manual can be applied to other poultry 
species, such as ducks, turkeys and guinea fowl.
village poultry:
•	 comprise local genetic stock (sometimes, but rarely, interbred  
with improved stock) 
•	 are raised extensively in relatively small numbers (between  
1–50 at any time, although more commonly 5–15 birds) 
•	 are not usually confined and obtain most of their diet from 
scavenging for food and water around the home (including 
household wastes) and village 
•	 require minimal investment in inputs, with most if not all of the 
inputs generated around the home
•	 engage labour inputs that are not salaried but are drawn from  
the family, with women and children commonly most responsible 
for their care
•	 production is geared essentially toward home consumption  
and savings (a living bank) for small expenses such as school  
fees and medicines.
Animal protein consumed in rural areas frequently comes from village chicken 
meat and eggs. Chickens can also be sold or bartered to meet family needs 
17Chapter 1  Introduction
such as medicines, clothes and school fees. In this way, they act as a ready 
source of cash for emergencies and small purchases. Village chickens 
provide manure and play a role in pest control. They are also important for 
special festivals or to meet social obligations, and they are essential for many 
traditional ceremonies and methods of treating illnesses. They are generally 
owned and managed by women and children, and are often an essential part 
of households headed by women.
Chicken meat and eggs
Chicken meat and eggs provide a readily available, high-quality 
source of proteins, vitamins and micronutrients. Eggs are an 
excellent source of iron, zinc and vitamin A, all of which are essential 
to health, growth and wellbeing. Chickens and eggs contribute to a 
nutritious, balanced diet, which is especially important for children, 
nursing mothers and people who are ill.
Village chickens play a very important role in poor rural communities in that 
they can convert feed available around a house or village (the ‘scavenging 
feed resource base’, SFRB—see Section 2.4) into highly nutritious, well-
appreciated products.
Although the output of traditional village chickens in terms of weight gain  
and number of eggs per hen per year is low, it is obtained with minimal  
labour and other inputs. This factor of low input and, consequently, low risk  
is one of the major advantages of village chicken production. It is important  
to remember that it is undesirable for any initial improvements to village 
chicken production to significantly raise the labour costs or financial risks 
involved in the activity.
Simple changes in management of village chickens can significantly 
improve production and the living conditions of many rural families in terms 
of enhanced nutrition and income generation through the sale of surplus 
chickens or eggs. Improved village chicken production is therefore a low-cost 
and important aspect of rural development.
1.2 About this manual
This manual follows on from ‘Controlling Newcastle disease in village 
chickens: a training manual’ (Alders et al. 2002). That manual and associated 
handbooks (see the Bibliography for a list of titles) were designed to help 
extension workers and community vaccinators to understand how Newcastle 
disease (ND) can be controlled in rural areas.
In many places, ND is considered the most significant constraint to village 
chicken production. Poultry farmers’ familiarity with the high mortality caused 
18 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
by ND has delayed the detection of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in 
many countries and complicated HPAI control measures. The effective control of 
ND will facilitate the early detection of incursions of HPAI by reducing mortality 
in flocks and improving relations between farmers and animal health authorities. 
However, once ND is controlled, there are other diseases that will naturally 
assume greater importance and which traditionally have received less attention 
in research and extension programs. While none of these diseases is likely  
to be individually as significant as ND, collectively they are very important and  
can markedly reduce the potential benefits from ND control.
As ND control improves, producers are motivated to take the next steps in 
improving their chicken production. They talk about increasing flock size, 
controlling other diseases, reducing mortalities from predators, minimising 
theft, improving feeding and organising better marketing systems. Once 
a successful ND control program is under way, extension agencies can 
prepare for the increase in the demand for information by organising training 
and information for extension officers. Until recently, however, most of the 
information relating to chicken production was directed toward intensive or 
semi-intensive systems. 
This manual aims to provide, for extension workers and livestock officers, 
basic information on the production of traditional village chickens and 
how productivity can be improved by introducing appropriate, low-cost 
approaches. The manual describes the initial steps that can be taken  
to improve village chicken production. More costly techniques, such as  
keeping birds permanently in chicken houses and supplying only commercial 
feed, are not covered in this manual, although information about these 
techniques can be obtained from documents posted on websites listed  
in the ‘Sources of further information’ section in Appendix 6. These 
other techniques could be tested by farmers after they are comfortable 
implementing the suggestions described in this manual and they have  
a good understanding of the extra costs and labour that would be required  
for more intensive chicken production.
Although this manual includes information on ND, the more comprehensive 
ND training manual mentioned earlier should be referred to for controlling 
this disease in areas where it is endemic. Once ND is under control, or in 
areas where ND is not endemic, farmers will be have a greater incentive to 
implement the measures suggested in this manual. 
1.3 How to use this manual
The manual is in three parts. 
•	 Part 1 gives general information about village chicken production and  
how to work with chicken producers. 
•	 Part 2 describes management and husbandry practices that will improve 
chicken production.
19Chapter 1  Introduction
•	 Part 3 deals with various poultry diseases and their control, with special 
emphasis on ND.
The manual is designed as a practical reference tool for extension workers, 
livestock officers and field veterinarians. Each chapter details improvements 
that could be applied by village chicken producers. The key extension 
messages of each chapter are summarised at its start.
The appendixes provide more detailed information that will assist people 
working with village chicken producers. While the main part of the manual 
deals with practical information that would be of direct use to village  
chicken producers, the appendixes are aimed at providing additional  
technical information. 
•	 Appendix 1 gives suggestions on how to use this manual as part  
of a training course. 
•	 Appendix 2 describes participatory exercises that could be used  
with village communities to identify problems. 
•	 Appendixes 3, 4 and 5 provide information on sample collection  
and serology.
•	 Appendix 6 provides sources of other information and further  
reading.
The order in which information in the manual could be used could  
vary as follows, according to the principal problem to be addressed  
in a particular area:
PRINCIPAl PROblEM
Newcastle disease (Nd) Part 1 Part 3 (plus ND training manual) Part 2
Other diseases Part 1 Part 3 Part 2
Management Part 1 Part 2 Part 3
Supplementary feeding Part 1 Part 2 Part 3
1.4 Promoting improved village chicken production using  
 minimal external inputs
Why should extension and development agencies promote improved village 
chicken production and why should they promote improvements that require 
minimal extra inputs?
Village chicken production has traditionally been underrated in  
importance as a vehicle for rural development. This has partly been due  
to the constraints that ND imposed on the development of this enterprise,  
but also because women’s activities and priorities in rural development  
in general, and livestock production specifically, have rarely been  
adequately addressed. 
20 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
Control of ND in endemic areas opens up further opportunities for 
improvement that were not previously feasible or considered worth 
undertaking. There are many improvements offering substantial  
benefits that can be achieved by farmers from within their own resources 
without cash expenditure or external assistance apart from appropriate 
extension advice. Examples would include measures for reducing  
chick mortality, predation and theft; management of other diseases;  
and improving flock management.
The benefits of village chicken raising are increasingly being recognised.
•	 Most rural families, including very poor households, keep some chickens 
or other poultry species. Chickens are often essential elements of  
female-headed and HIV/AIDS-affected households. Improvements in 
chicken production would therefore have a significant effect on most  
rural families, but especially the poorest and most marginalised people  
in rural communities.
•	 Significant returns can be achieved from village chickens without  
the need for expensive housing, complex technology and funding  
for the purchase of inputs not available locally. 
•	 Chicken meat and eggs are a source of high-quality nutrients  
(e.g. proteins and micronutrients) that are often otherwise unavailable  
to resource-poor families.
•	 Village chickens are often cared for by women and children and so 
programs that improve production will simultaneously improve the income 
and knowledge of these household members.
•	 Smallholders can produce chickens at little or no cost, which has a very 
significant competitive advantage over almost any other income-producing 
activity that they may choose. As such, the activity is essentially financially 
risk free, with or without ND control. 
Interventions and improvements should be designed to take advantage of the 
natural competitive advantages inherent in village chicken production. There 
will still be significant risks of disease, predation and theft following ND control 
and other management improvements. Any interventions that need more than 
minimal purchased inputs or other cash outlays should be avoided in the first 
instance, as such may increase poverty and food insecurity.
Table 1 compares the conditions and resources required for extensive,  
semi-intensive and intensive smallholder production of chickens.
21Chapter 1  Introduction
Table 1. Comparison of chicken production systems
Criteria Extensive rural 
production
Semi-intensive 
smallholder production
Intensive smallholder 
production
local conditions
Access to reliable  
electricity supply
No Yes Yes
Existence of cold 
chain
No Yes Yes
Feed source Scavenging; 
occasional 
supplementation
Scavenging; 
supplementation 
necessary
Commercial  
balanced ration
Production/farming 
system
Mixed, livestock  
and crops 
Usually poultry only Poultry only
Access to urban 
markets
No, or indirect Yes Yes
Poultry breeds Local Commercial or crossbred Commercial
Flock size 1–50 50–200 >200
Access to 
veterinary services 
and veterinary 
pharmaceuticals
Sometimes Yes Yes
Source of new chicks Natural incubation Commercial day-old 
chicks
Commercial day-old 
chicks
Poultry housing Sometimes; usually 
made from local 
materials
Yes; conventional 
materials; houses of 
variable quality
Yes; conventional 
materials; good-quality 
houses
Time devoted each 
day to poultry
<30 minutes 1 hour >1 hour
Other livestock 
raised
Usually Sometimes No
Inputs required
Training Basic: Newcastle 
disease (ND) 
control, highly 
pathogenic avian 
influenza (HPAI) 
control (in affected 
areas); fowl cholera 
control (in some 
areas); poultry 
husbandry and 
management
Moderate: control of 
ND, HPAI, infectious 
bursal disease/Gumboro 
disease, fowl cholera 
and fowl pox; breed 
selection; supplementary 
feeding; appropriate 
housing; husbandry; 
financial management
Considerable:  
wide-ranging disease 
control; breed 
selection; use of 
balanced ration; good 
housing; husbandry; 
financial management
Veterinary services 
and pharmaceuticals
Minimal Essential Essential
Source:	adapted	from	Alders	(2004)
22 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
1.5 Gender and village chickens 
Knowing who is responsible for raising village chickens is of the utmost 
importance when planning to improve production. 
The analysis of gender relations is of major importance for any type of 
intervention in rural areas, because the paradigms of access, control and 
benefits of the resources and consequently of exclusion are based on the social 
relations between men and women. As a consequence, the understanding of 
gender relations and their implications for livestock raising are important to 
promote appropriate interventions.
The different members of the household can have different, even contradictory, 
interests in agricultural production and livestock. The processes of decision-
making in households and communities are complex and dynamic. Although male 
and female farmers have a lot in common, they often have different interests and 
problems. Men and women may have different interests in relation to animals they 
have access to and control over. With the animals raised, each species plays a 
specific role and is owned and cared for by different individuals in the household. 
These issues have to be considered in the interest of establishing successful 
collaboration and dialogue with male and female farmers.
1.6 Newcastle disease and avian influenza control, and  
 other production improvements
It is estimated that control of ND alone could increase household income derived 
from village chickens by 40–60%. Furthermore, when ND control is coupled with 
other simple production initiatives, household income could increase by around 
80% above pre-ND control levels. Although these figures are only estimates, they 
illustrate the value to be gained from a holistic approach to ND control, where 
the potential impact of ND control can be doubled if some additional measures 
are adopted by farmers. These measures involve little additional expenditure by 
government, donors and households. 
Case study: 
Sra Luisa Arnaldo, a 36-year-old widow with three children lives in 
Chirodzi-Ponte, Mozambique. She started raising three chickens in 
2000 but the number did not increase due to regular outbreaks of ND. 
In the middle of 2003, she started to vaccinate her chickens and has 
since participated in five vaccination campaigns, paying Mozambican 
metical (MZM) 500 (US$0.025) per bird to the community vaccinator. 
In October 2004, she had 25 chickens and decided to sell 5 roosters. 
The roosters sold for MZM45,000 each (i.e. US$2.25), raising a 
total of MZM225,000. She used MZM150,000 to buy a goat that has 
subsequently become pregnant. At the time of the interview, all of her 
children attend primary school.
23Chapter 1  Introduction
The effective control of ND, and the associated reduction in mortality, 
contributes greatly to the early detection of HPAI. HPAI must be considered 
when high mortality occurs in a flock already vaccinated against ND. 
1.7 Village chicken production and HIV/AIDS mitigation
Village chickens require the lowest capital investment of any livestock species 
and they have a short production cycle. They also play an important role 
in households where there is a lack of able-bodied workers, such as those 
affected by HIV/AIDS or which have a disabled family member. Goats and 
cattle require herders to stay with them during the day, but this is impossible 
in households without working adults. 
In households headed by widows, children or grandparents, chickens 
represent the easiest species to raise for sale and home consumption, 
providing a source of high-quality proteins, energy and vitamins, all of which 
play an important role in the nutrition of HIV/AIDS patients. It is generally 
acknowledged that poultry production is the most efficient and cost-effective 
way to increase the availability of high-protein food. Eggs are also a good 
source of other essential nutrients and can be stored under village conditions 
more easily than most foods of animal origin.
Families affected by HIV/AIDS will be more likely to make use of the benefits 
of chickens and eggs if veterinary services work in collaboration with 
education and health ministries. Improved chicken production and use of 
chicken meat and eggs can be incorporated into an overall strategy for 
supporting households affected by HIV/AIDS.
1.8 Organic village chicken production
As economies grow, consumer preference tends towards high-quality meat 
and eggs that are free of undesirable residues. Examples of the marketing 
and export of village chickens to supply this growing market already exist in 
South-East Asia and opportunities exist in Africa.
Farmers interested in producing organic village chickens should therefore 
avoid the use of antibiotics, insecticides and other products that could  
leave chemical residues in their birds. Products such as antibiotics and 
insecticides tend to be expensive and, in many cases, their use in village 
chickens is of questionable long-term value. Indeed, the misuse of antibiotics 
can cause the development of resistant strains of bacteria, making the 
antibiotics less effective. 
1.9 Village chicken production and wildlife conservation
The development and maintenance of national parks in many countries must 
address the multifaceted needs of biodiversity conservation, sustainable 
tourism development and communities living in the vicinity. Initiatives that 
24 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
bring government, communities, non-government organisations (NGOs) 
and commercial ventures together to stimulate economic linkages, local 
participation and partnerships promote both biodiversity and increased 
wellbeing among local communities. Improved village chicken production  
in communities surrounding national parks can reduce hunting of wildlife  
for consumption and income.
25
2 General information about village 
 chicken production
2.1 The village chicken system
Chickens are kept under a variety of husbandry systems, ranging from 
scavenging flocks to birds confined in pens and cages for their entire lives. 
Village farmers have flocks made up of chickens of various ages of both sexes. 
The flock is generally allowed to forage freely (or scavenge) in the village, 
forest, fields and along roadsides. This is very different from the commercial 
chicken production system which requires far greater management of the 
chickens and is more costly (Table 2).
Table 2.  Comparison of village and commercial chicken production factors
Factor village chickens Commercial chickens
Labour inputs Minimal Considerable
Housing Trees; chicken houses of local material; 
inexpensive
Chicken unit using conventional 
materials; expensive
Nutrition
Scavenging feed resource base, leftover 
food, cereals, no supplements; inexpensive
Balanced commercial ration; 
expensive
Water
Well water, used water, natural sources Clean water supply essential
Production Low; could improve with better nutrition, 
disease control and shelter from predators
High; but requires a high level of 
inputs
Meat quality Little fat; pleasant flavour; tougher  
texture
Broilers have more fat; less 
flavour; softer texture
Adaptability Good: good flight skills, more likely  
to escape predators, can scavenge  
for own feed
Limited: poor flight skills, easily 
caught by predators, less skilled  
at scavenging
Reproduction Good hatching and mothering ability; 
hens lay, brood, hatch and look after 
young 
Poor hatching and mothering 
ability; commercial breed hens 
often do not go broody; new birds 
are bought to replace old birds
Veterinary 
inputs
Very limited; Newcastle disease 
vaccination
Control of many viral, bacterial 
and parasitic diseases essential 
for efficient production
Environmental 
impact
Minimal: can be positive through  
provision of organic fertiliser and  
pest control
Negative: intensive production 
of cereals for rations; occasional 
improper use of antibiotics; excess 
ammonia production
The unimproved scavenging chicken system has the following characteristics:
•	 low input/low output. Owners put in small amounts of time and money 
with the expectation of low returns. This is especially so where there is no 
ND control, as there is a high chance that most of the chickens will die 
from this disease in endemic areas.
26 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
•	 Care of chickens is generally one of many female domestic tasks. 
People like to have chickens around but spend only a relatively small 
amount of time or labour on them every day. Their care is mainly the 
responsibility of women and children. As frequently happens with activities 
performed by women, chicken raising is often not recognised as ‘real’ 
work even although the birds must receive daily care. 
•	 Small-scale. On average, a family has 5–15 birds and, since the mortality 
rate is high and few eggs are produced, they barely manage to maintain 
these numbers from generation to generation.
•	 Subject to high mortality rates. Causes of mortality include predation, 
malnutrition, disease and exposure to the elements; with exposure to  
the elements often occurring in the first few weeks of a chick’s life.
•	 well-adapted to village conditions. Due to their scavenging ability and 
the agility to escape predators, village chickens can survive where  
improved breeds would not. Productivity is relatively low due to genetic 
potential, low levels of feed and other inputs and, in the case of egg 
production, the requirement for the hen to brood around three batches  
of chickens each year.
•	 Can make use of locally available feeds. The chicken finds its own feed 
around the house or village. This feed is finite and variable, depending  
on the area and time of year.
•	 A source of high-quality nutrients and income. Despite the relatively low 
productivity in terms of meat and eggs, village chickens are an important 
source of high-quality protein for household nutrition. They also provide 
income for poor rural people. The village chicken can convert feed not 
eaten by humans into high-quality food. Neither do village chickens require 
large quantities of human food such as maize, so they do not compete 
with families for scarce food resources.
•	 Independent of large financial investment. Some form of housing may 
be provided for the chickens but this is often rudimentary. Owners may 
house chickens inside the family home at night-time to protect them from 
predators and theft. They do so despite the increased risks of infection or 
infestation, as very poor families put immediate security concerns ahead  
of uncertain biosecurity risk.
•	 Self-replicating. The traditional hen is a good incubator and mother: she 
arranges her own nest, lays a clutch of eggs, incubates the eggs and looks 
after the chicks that hatch.
2.2 Comparisons between village chickens and  
 commercial chicken production
Village chicken production differs considerably from commercial chicken 
production not only in terms of inputs and productivity but also in the 
occurrence of and susceptibility to diseases. The differences are related  
to the type of birds used as well as to husbandry and flock management.
Tables 2 and 3 outline the main differences between village and commercial 
chickens and the factors that influence the health of chickens kept under  
each production system.
27
Table 3. Differences in flock health management between extensive (village) and   
intensive (commercial) chicken production systems
village chicken production Commercial chicken production
Advantages:
•		 Local	breeds	are	adapted	to	harsh	
conditions, and resist diseases and poor 
husbandry conditions much better than 
breeds used for commercial production.
•		 Scavenging	chickens	are	free	to	choose	
their feed (provided that there is enough) 
and escape difficult conditions. Due to this, 
the consequences of poor husbandry and 
nutrition are not as severe as in intensive 
production systems.
•		 A	village	chicken	flock	consists	of	birds	of	
various age groups. Since several diseases 
affect only certain age groups, the effect of 
these diseases will not be as devastating as 
in flocks where all birds are the same age.
•		 Little	veterinary	input	is	required.
Advantages:
•		 ‘All-in	–	all-out’	principle	(all	birds	of	a	flock	
are bought and sold at the same time) 
allows thorough cleaning and disinfection 
before the introduction of new birds. Proper 
cleaning and disinfection guarantees good 
conditions for the new flock.
•		 Hygiene	measures	(e.g.	limited	contact	with	
other birds, people, animals or equipment 
that might transmit an infectious disease) 
are quite easy to implement.
•		 Veterinary	interventions	such	as	vaccination	
or application of commercial drugs are 
easier to conduct when birds are confined.
Disadvantages:
•		 There	are	almost	always	birds	in	the	 
flock (no ‘all-in – all-out’ principle) that  
could transmit any infectious agent to  
newly introduced birds.
•		 Under	scavenging	conditions	it	is	difficult	to	
avoid contact of chickens with other birds, 
people, animals or equipment that might 
transmit an infectious disease.
•		 Chickens	on	free	range	without	
supplementary feeding will suffer when 
the scavenging feed resource base is low 
(because of the season or because there 
are too many chickens) and consequently 
can have poor health.
Disadvantages:
•		 Commercial	breeds	with	high	productivity	
are less resistant to diseases than village 
poultry.
•		 Commercial	flocks	require	comprehensive	
vaccination programs and regular veterinary 
observation to ensure efficient production.
•		 Birds	kept	in	intensive	production	systems	
rely completely on balanced nutrition, good 
housing conditions and veterinary care. If 
any mistake is made, the health of all birds 
will decrease.
•		 Since	all	birds	in	the	flock	are	the	same	age	
and should be in the same condition, any 
outbreak of disease will affect all birds.
•		 Infectious	diseases	spread	faster	in	large,	
dense flocks.
2.3 Production characteristics of village chickens
Basic production characteristics for village chickens are as follows:
•	 Hens start laying when 24–30 weeks’ old (Figure 1). At any given time,  
only about half the hens are productive and some 8–10% never lay.
•	 Egg weight averages 40 g (range 27–65 g).
•	 Most birds produce 2–4 clutches per year, although some birds  
may produce 5–6 clutches. There are about 10 eggs per clutch, with  
a range of between 5 and 20.
•	 About 70–90% of the eggs will hatch (this varies with the season).
•	 Typically, about 8 chicks per clutch will hatch, with a range of  
between 4 and 15.
Chapter 2  General information about village chicken production
28 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
•	 Only 20–50% of chicks hatched will reach adulthood. Approximately 85% 
of these losses occur in the first 3 weeks of life. Adult mortality is very 
variable and depends on specific local conditions and the occurrence of 
diseases.
•	 Both sexes have a body weight of about 0.5 kg at 10–12 weeks (although 
males are slightly heavier). Adult hens weigh between 1.0 and 1.5 kg, while 
roosters weigh between 1.3 and 2.5 kg.
2 months
6 months
4 months
21 days
Figure 1.  The life cycle of a typical village chicken

29
2.4 The scavenging feed resource base
Scavenging for feed is a major characteristic of extensive poultry-keeping 
systems. Birds are free to forage and they usually manage to get a reasonably 
balanced diet. Nevertheless, their diet is restricted in quality and quantity to 
what they manage to find. The locally available feed is called the ‘scavenging 
feed resource base’ (SFRB). The SFRB is limited and has to be shared by all 
birds in the area.
the scavenging feed resource base: 
•	 comprises household waste, crop by-products and a range of 
food from gardens, fields and wastelands
•	 varies from one area to another, with season, with the size and 
wealth of the household, and with the area that the chickens have 
to roam (the village population density) 
•	 is generally greater during the wet season, reaches its peak 
following the harvest (with increased crop residues and waste 
from higher family food intake) and gradually declines as the dry 
season progresses and green grass and leaves disappear 
•	 is generally greater in areas where rainfall is higher and there are 
more-diverse household-sourced feeds such as coconut waste, 
cassava and horticultural waste 
•	 may be limited in arid areas where the poorest families survive 
on a minimal area of crops such as maize, sorghum, millet or 
cassava. They cannot afford animal draft power and so the area 
cropped depends on family labour only, and household gardens 
provide few pickings.
the SFRb is an important aspect to consider when promoting 
improved village chicken production. Control of diseases and improved 
management will result in a larger number of birds in a village. If this is 
not carefully managed (through the consumption and sale of additional 
birds) then the village environment will not be able to support the 
nutritional requirements of these larger flocks.
Chapter 2  General information about village chicken production
30 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
3 Working together with male and    
 female village chicken producers
3.1 Introduction
When commencing a program to support village chicken production, it is 
advisable to first work with male and female farmers in the village to determine:
•	 what is the current level of chicken production in the village or area?
•	 what are the main constraints to production?
•	 what options are available to reduce the impact of the identified 
constraints? 
•	 what is the best way to promote the chosen options?
Newcastle disease is often, but not always, the most important constraint 
to village chicken production. It is best to work with a village community to 
understand the role that chickens play within the farming system and the 
major constraints that limit production. This process is not only helpful to the 
extension agencies, but also assists men and women to think about the crucial 
role of chickens and to encourage the community, and specifically the women, 
to work with extension services to improve production. 
Once ND has been controlled, participatory techniques may also be useful to 
identify other production constraints and to help the community to evaluate 
the changes that follow ND control and other management activities.
This section outlines how an extension agency can work with a village 
community to promote informed decision-making and problem resolution 
based on a respect for male and female farmers and the principles of 
community participation and gender sensitivity. 
Gender-sensitive methodologies and gender awareness should be included in:
•	 training of trainers, extension staff and vaccinators
•	 the introduction of activities into villages with participatory rural appraisal 
exercises and selection of vaccinators
•	 a baseline survey and subsequent application of a questionnaire for 
evaluation of the impact of ND vaccination campaigns
•	 participatory monitoring and evaluation of the impact of ND vaccination 
campaigns and other interventions
•	 ongoing monitoring and refinement of the program.
The process is divided into a number of phases that involve:
•	 awareness-raising activities and problem identification 
•	 deciding what are the best means of overcoming the identified constraints 
and planning activities within the community
31
•	 implementing the activities
•	 monitoring and evaluating the results.
3.2 Phase 1: Raising awareness and identifying problems
1. One or more meetings should be held with male and female village leaders 
to discuss the importance of, and constraints to, chicken production 
and what can be done to improve production. Leaders can include 
government representatives, traditional and religious leaders, farmers’ 
and women’s organisations, school teachers, healthcare staff and cultural 
groups. The objective of these meetings is to introduce the extension 
team to the leaders, discuss the types of support and activities that can be 
implemented, confirm villagers’ interest and define the ways in which the 
community and its leaders will participate. The importance of the role that 
women play in chicken raising should be discussed, and ways proposed 
to ensure their active participation in all phases of the intervention.
 A meeting should then be held with the whole community to discuss the 
constraints to village chicken production. The agenda for the meeting 
should enable coverage of items such as:
•	 an introduction of the extension team and an explanation of their 
various roles
•	 emphasis that the major aim of the program is to help villagers fight 
poverty by improving poultry production
•	 a reminder that you are there to help them to resolve problems relating 
to local chicken production, not to distribute free goods to people
•	 a number of group exercises with the community to help characterise 
chicken production, identify the role that men and women play in this 
activity and the main constraints to production in the village
•	 facilitation of community planning and implementation of activities that 
aim to resolve the identified problems
•	 confirmation that the community is interested in working with you to 
improve chicken production.
2. The final part of this phase involves organising and conducting a number 
of participatory exercises with the community; with men and women 
separately, if possible. Examples of participatory exercises are described in 
detail in Appendix 2, but the list there is not complete and other exercises 
could be used. Furthermore, it may not be necessary to conduct all of the 
exercises described in Appendix 2, and extension agents should select 
those that they think are most appropriate to local circumstances.
 The main aim of the participatory exercises is to use techniques that 
involve as many members of the community as possible and to work with 
male and female farmers to describe the current situation and identify 
problems and possible solutions.
Chapter 3  working together with male and female village chicken producers
32 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers
Organising community meetings
Community meetings should be organised with the permission 
of, and in conjunction with, village leaders. Select a day and time 
when the maximum number of people can attend. Village leaders 
will probably know the best way of informing the community about 
the meeting, although extra publicity could also be provided by 
the extension services, if necessary. This could include the use of 
notices, megaphones, and informing teachers and religious leaders 
about the meeting. 
It is important to encourage the participation of men and women, 
and of poorer or more marginalised families in the community. 
Women are often responsible for the care of poultry, while poorer 
families stand to benefit most from improved chicken production. 
Promote this participation in any discussion with village leaders and 
in any publicity activities.  Remember to consider the needs of these 
groups when planning the time and location of meetings.
3.3 Phase 2: Identifying solutions and planning activities
Phase 2 is implemented immediately after Phase 1.
1. Organise a meeting with all the residents to give feedback on the 
information collected from the participatory exercises in male and female 
groups and to decide how best to solve the constraints identified. 
•	 The results of the exercises are presented and discussed with  
the community. 
•	 Further participatory exercises can be used to explore the best 
solutions to the problems and constraints that the community has 
identified (see Appendix 2 for examples of exercises). 
•	 It may help to ask the community if they would like to nominate a poultry 
group or committee that would be the main focal point for organising 
and implementing poultry activities in the community. A group such as 
a livestock or agricultural committee may already exist in some villages. 
While the group should be selected by the community, the extension 
agents should try to ensure that its members are representative of male, 
female, and poor and disadvantaged people as well as leaders.  
A balance in terms of gender should be achieved.
•	 According to the decisions taken, other meetings and interventions  
can then be planned. 
2. If a group has been selected, organise a meeting with its members to help 
define their roles and responsibilities and to start planning activities based 
on the discussions held with the community. Appendix 2 contains ideas on 
how to assist this process.
33
3. Once plans have been made, meet with the community to discuss and 
approve the final strategy.
3.4 Phase 3: Implementing activities
Activities should be implemented as a joint process between the community, 
the local poultry group (if there is one), other leaders and community groups, 
and the extension agency. 
It is important to encourage discussion within the community so that everyone 
can constantly evaluate what is being done and have an opportunity to 
comment on activities and suggest improvements. Although it is good to try 
to follow the plans drawn up with the community, activities should be flexible 
enough to adjust to unforeseen problems.
3.5 Phase 4: Monitoring and evaluating the results
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is an ongoing process of continually looking 
at plans and activities to try to improve what is being done. The extension 
agency and community may wish to organise a formal M&E strategy so as 
to better guide the whole extension process. However, even if that is not 
possible, extension agents and community members should continually 
evaluate what they are doing in an informal way so as to identify and resolve 
problems at an early stage and always be seeking to improve the way they 
are doing things. This mainly involves promoting an attitude of persistently 
questioning how things are going and how they can be improved.
Evaluation activities should include, at the least, regular meetings with the 
community and/or the community poultry group to discuss the implementation 
and results of activities. Some of the earlier community exercises in same-sex 
groups can also be regularly repeated (perhaps once per year) to see what 
changes are happening. These exercises may include:
•	 family roles related to chicken raising
•	 chicken-raising calendar
•	 ranking of activities according to their contribution to household income
•	 ranking of problems related to chicken raising
•	 focus group discussions
•	 case studies.
Appendix 2 describes how to conduct these exercises.
Chapter 3  working together with male and female village chicken producers
34 Part 1  village chickens and village chicken farmers

35
PART 2
Housing, nutrition and management
Newcastle disease is endemic in village chicken flocks in many countries. 
Since it regularly devastates family flocks, farmers have little incentive to 
improve productivity by investing in additional husbandry or management 
interventions such as improved housing or supplementary feeding. Now, 
however, the advent of effective thermotolerant vaccines has significantly 
improved the control of ND in villages. In areas where there are regular 
vaccination campaigns, it is worthwhile considering basic husbandry 
techniques that could increase the amount of chicken meat and eggs  
available for household consumption and for sale.
Villagers value their chickens but they are most often just left to fend for 
themselves under completely free-range conditions. The chickens find their 
own feed and water, breed at random, lay their eggs where they find it suitable 
to do so and raise their chicks on their own. Villagers slaughter or sell their 
chickens only when necessary and, in many regions, eggs are not collected 
for sale or consumption but rather left for the hen to hatch. 
Farmers are often cautious of change and are naturally wary of taking on 
added risk or adopting practices different from those that have worked in 
the past. This is especially so for poorer farmers, as they are putting at risk 
the lives and health of themselves and their families. Management changes 
should therefore be introduced gradually. In addition, extension staff should 
undertake participatory exercises with the community to find out what are 
the most serious problems and which practices would have the greatest 
chance of being adopted. Start with those practices and then introduce other 
improvements once farmers have seen the benefits of the innovations.
The three main chapters in this part of the manual describe simple 
management practices that will help to turn village farmers from passive 
observers of their chickens into active producers, while still using minimal 
labour and other inputs. Chickens can become a more productive and 
important part of the farming system with little financial risk and impediment  
to the other activities of farmers. 
Flocks from different households in a village intermingle, interbreed and share 
the same feed resources. Hence, families should be encouraged to work 
together with their neighbours and learn from each other.
36 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
4 Chicken housing and shelter
4.1 Introduction
Housing village chickens at night will protect them from rain and the cold,  
from predators such as rats, snakes and other wild animals, and dogs, and 
from theft. Also, housed birds are easier to catch to inspect for signs of illness 
or injury, or to vaccinate them against diseases.
Since exploitation of the scavenging feed resource base is one of the 
major advantages of the low-input village chicken production system, 
housing for adult and older growing birds should be provided only at 
night and the chickens allowed to free range for feed during the day.
4.2 Types of housing
Adult birds and growers are often provided with elevated night housing 
(Figures 2 and 3).
 
Figure 2.  Houses built on poles to raise them well above the ground protect the 
chickens from predators such as rats, snakes and other wild animals, and 
dogs. They can also have inverted metal cones around the legs to prevent 
snakes and rats climbing them.
37Chapter 4  Chicken housing and shelter
Chicken houses built close to the ground are suitable for hens with young 
chicks that cannot enter an elevated house. It may be necessary to dig a 
drain around such a house or to raise the floor, so that it will stay dry during 
the rainy season. The cage shown in Figure 4 does not have a floor and 
can be moved to a new place every day or two. Chickens can be housed in 
these cages overnight or confined in them for some time during the day. The 
chickens scratch the ground to find feed for themselves. A house like the one 
in the drawing is about 4 m long, 1 m wide and 1.5 m high. It can hold 8–10 
adult birds if they are kept enclosed all day, or about 20 for overnight housing. 
The house can be completely covered with wooden slats or be partly open 
with netting or woven bamboo. This type of house may also be suitable for 
holding a hen with her young chicks for the first week or two after hatching.
Figure 3. Locally made cages can be moved easily and kept off the ground. They 
may be used to keep chickens inside the house overnight or to separate 
newly introduced or sick chickens from the flock for several days. This 
locally made house is easy to move and can be put on a metal or wooden 
sheet above the ground.
 
 
Figure 4.  Another type of large cage that can be moved easily
38 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
4.3 Constructing a chicken house
The following are some simple rules for building a chicken house. 
•	 Clear the grass and bush for about three paces (3 metres) on all sides of 
the house site to keep snakes and rats away from the chickens.
•	 A house can be built cheaply using local materials such as tree and bush 
branches or reeds and thatch grass.
•	 The size of the house will depend on how many birds the villager has 
(or plans to have) and if they are to be kept in the house overnight or for 
longer periods. For 10–15 adult birds, the size of the house should be 
about one large pace (1 metre) wide by one to two large paces long. If too 
many birds are kept together they may start to peck each other, leading to 
injury and diseases.
•	 Always remove the bark from timber used to construct the houses so that 
pests and parasites such as ticks and mites will have nowhere to hide.
•	 The house should protect the chickens from rain and wind but have 
enough ventilation to provide birds with fresh, clean air.
•	 The opening should be wide enough to allow the inside of the house to be 
cleaned easily and should be fitted with a door or other means of closure.
•	 Because many infectious diseases of chickens are transmitted via their 
droppings, the floor of the house should be slatted to allow the droppings 
to fall through (e.g. by using branches as a floor). The spaces between the 
slats will depend on the age and size of the chickens, ensuring they have 
adequate foot support and that droppings can pass through.
•	 If the chicken house is built on poles, it should be at least 60 cm above 
the ground but not so high that the inside of it cannot be reached by the 
villager.
•	 Putting inverted metal cones around the poles of a chicken house will 
make it harder for rats and snakes to get into it.
4.4 Roosts/perches
Perches are favoured by chickens, as they like to sleep above the floor. 
Roosting on perches will minimise the contact between the birds and their 
droppings, and therefore help to prevent diseases. The roosts can be made 
from bamboo or straight tree branches (remember to debark the branches). 
They should be about 3 cm in diameter. Each adult chicken requires about  
20 cm of perch space. If more than one perch is needed, the perches should 
be about 50 cm apart and at the same level. If they are at different levels, the 
birds will fight to reach the highest perch when they come in to roost in the 
evening, causing unnecessary stress.
39
4.5 Maintaining a chicken house
Cleaning the chicken house helps to prevent and control diseases, especially 
external parasites such as fleas and mites. The following procedures should 
be adopted.
•	 Remove droppings and litter from the inside of the house regularly (once a 
week) or, if the house is portable, move it to a fresh area.
•	 Fumigate the chicken house regularly with smoke (by lighting a fire under 
elevated chicken houses or placing cages above kitchen fires) to control 
external parasites (every 6 months).
•	 Clear the grass and bush around the chicken house to keep snakes and 
rats away.
•	 Do not overcrowd the chicken house.
•	 Empty a house where sick birds have been; clean it or even burn it and 
build a new one.
•	 Regularly remove the droppings from underneath the chicken house; 
compost them for at least 3 weeks, then place the manure on gardens, 
mixing it into the soil to reduce the chance of diseases and parasites 
accumulating and to prevent flies from reproducing in it. Flies will not be a 
problem if the manure is kept dry.
•	 Place wood ash or lime on the floor and walls to repel external parasites and 
aid the removal of manure when cleaning.
Safe use of chicken manure
Break up chicken manure so that it dries quickly—this will help to kill 
infectious agents and the eggs of parasitic worms within the manure.  
Digging composted manure into vegetable gardens will fertilise the 
soil, leading to better plant growth.
4.6 Provision of nests
Provision of clean nests in safe places assists in controlling and improving 
productivity. The quality of eggs is better if they are clean. Moreover, it is easier 
to find eggs if nests are provided rather than allowing birds to lay eggs in 
hidden locations.
Locally available items such as baskets, boxes, buckets or similar containers 
can be used for nests. Pad the containers with clean, dry nesting material 
(e.g. leaves, straw, old cloth or even sand) to help to keep the eggs warm and 
minimise the risk of breakage or contamination.
Chapter 4  Chicken housing and shelter
40 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Some tips on the provision of nests follow:
•	 A sufficient number of nests should be provided: 1 per hen or, if there are 
more than 5 hens in a flock, 1–2 nests fewer than the number of hens.
•	 Eggs intended for brooding should not be removed from where the hen 
laid them, otherwise they might be abandoned.
•	 Nests should be located in safe places, protected from rain and wind, and 
out of reach of dogs, other predators and ants.
•	 Nests should be constructed in a way that protects the eggs from cooling 
from below or from falling out of the nest (Figure 5).
•	 Nests should be cleaned regularly.
•	 Nests that have been used for a long time should be fumigated with smoke 
(e.g. every 6 months).
•	 If there has been a serious outbreak of disease or a heavy infestation of 
external parasites (e.g. lice), the nests should be burnt and replaced using 
new materials.
 
 
Figure 5.  A hen will hatch more chicks if her nest is clean, dry and safe. 
She will favour a nest that sits above the ground and is provided  
with clean straw or grass.
41
4.7 Protection from predators and theft
4.7.1 Predators
Predators are a major problem in village chicken production, causing almost 
unavoidable losses in free-range systems. 
Predators of chickens include other birds, mammals and reptiles, and even 
ants. Protective measures should be designed around which predators are 
common in the region and how these predators hunt. Birds of prey often circle 
high in the air and suddenly dive to catch a victim seen on open ground. Other 
predators, including some birds, hide in trees in search of their prey. Wild cats, 
foxes and other four-legged hunters usually prefer to use the cover of bushes 
to approach their prey unnoticed. Rats and snakes are more likely to catch 
chicks that are confined or housed. Losses due to ants have been reported 
only for caged chicks, and where the chick shelter has been built across 
the ants’ nest or path. Farm animals such as dogs also enjoy an occasional 
chicken dinner and should be kept under control.
Implementation of the following general measures will help reduce losses  
due to predators:
•	 Construct shelters to offer protection from predators. Build a chicken 
house on poles and put inverted metal cones around the legs to make it 
harder for predators to enter.
•	 Clear the grass and bush around the chicken house, so as to limit hiding 
places for predators.
•	 Do not provide feed or water in extensive open areas where chickens can 
be attacked easily by birds of prey.
•	 Do not provide feed or water next to dense bushes where cats, rats or 
snakes can wait for their prey.
•	 Hang small pieces of tin in a tree or on a long pole close to the area to be 
protected. The noise produced and sunlight reflected when the tin moves 
with the wind might deter predators.
•	 Chickens with coloured feathers are better camouflaged than unicoloured 
(e.g. bright white) birds, which are an easier target for a predator.
4.7.2 Theft
In areas where chicken theft is a serious problem, many farmers keep their 
birds inside the family house during the night, rather than in a separate 
chicken house. In their opinion, a separate chicken house makes it easier 
for thieves to steal the birds. However, keeping birds in the house might be 
unhygienic (especially when the birds suffer from parasites or disease such as 
HPAI) and, if the flock is big, is impractical.
Chapter 4  Chicken housing and shelter
42 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Keeping the birds in a separate but safe place is therefore strongly 
recommended. Measures that might be adopted to minimise theft from a 
separate chicken house include the following:
•	 The chicken house could be fitted with a very noisy opening that will alert 
the owner in case of attempted theft.
•	 Roosts could be placed at more than an arm’s length from the opening 
so that birds are out of reach of thieves. This design is used in northern 
Malawi. Disadvantages of this type of chicken house are that it is more 
difficult to clean and for the owners to catch the birds for vaccination.
•	 The chicken house could be built next to one of the outside walls of the 
family house.
Nevertheless, when theft is a big problem, farmers may see guarding their 
chickens inside the house as the only solution. In such cases, to avoid the 
chickens roaming around the room or even the house as a whole, it would 
be best to construct one or more portable cages (according to the flock size) 
that can be placed in any corner. Portable cages should have short legs, and 
slatted floors to allow the droppings to fall through. Put large leaves, old paper 
or sacks under the cages to catch the droppings or feathers for easy removal 
from the house. To avoid fighting inside cages, it is best to provide at least 
1 m
2 of floor area for every 10 birds. Another possibility is to construct perches 
in one corner of the family house (see Section 4.4). This will encourage the 
birds to roost in one place inside the house. The roost can be placed over 
leaves, sand, ash or sacks to make cleaning easier. 
daily removal of the droppings and feathers, or cleaning of the place 
where the birds were kept overnight, is necessary to avoid negative 
consequences for human health. No inside housing of birds should be 
practised in areas where zoonotic diseases such as HPAI are present.
43
5 Nutrition
5.1  Water
Chickens need water for survival, growth, activity and egg production. Five 
chickens will drink about 1 litre of water every day and they will need more 
than this when it is very hot. Water should be available at all times. 
Although chicks can survive for several days without feed, they will quickly die 
without access to water. Complete water deprivation may result in death in less 
than a day during hot weather. During hot weather, if a chicken has not had 
access to water for some time, it may drink too much when it is does obtain 
water and this could result in diarrhoea. To avoid this, chickens should always 
have access to fresh, preferably cool water. If water is accidentally forgotten 
and provided only at the end of a hot day, at first only small quantities should 
be given.
Scavenging chickens usually manage to find enough water to survive. 
However, chickens, especially young chicks and laying hens, will perform 
much better when provided with water.
While clean, fresh water is best, when water is scarce, chickens can be offered 
used water as long as it contains no detergents or other harmful substances.
Waterers should be:
•	 not too high, so that all age groups can drink without risk of drowning 
(Figure 6)
•	 not too large, so as to avoid contamination with droppings (and ducks 
bathing in it)
•	 cleaned daily
•	 kept constantly in the same place that the chickens get used to (helpful in 
case of the need to add medication via the water)
•	 placed where the chickens will be at least risk of attack by predators.
Clay bowls make simple but effective waterers. They should have a flat bottom 
and vertical sides so that they are not easily tipped over. They should not be 
so deep that the chicks can drown in them. Waterers need to be cleaned and 
refilled daily (or more frequently if they become dirty during the day).
Waterers for young chicks should have a lower lip of approximately the same 
height as the backs of the chick, so that the chicks can easily reach the water 
but not dirty it. Place stones on the floor of the waterer so that the chicks will 
not drown if they accidentally step into it.
44 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Figure 6.  A chicken can live for several days without eating but if it does not have 
water it may die within a day during hot weather. It is very important that 
chickens always have access to water—preferably clean and fresh. 
5.2 Scavenging
Making best use of the scavenging feed resource base (SFRB) is a major 
characteristic of extensive poultry-keeping systems. The SFRB includes 
various types of green feed, seeds and fruits, insects, worms, minerals in the 
soil, gleanings from cultivated fields, bran when cereals are processed and 
household food scraps and leftovers. 
At some times, the SFRB is deficient in protein-rich feeds while at others, 
energy-rich feeds may be lacking. The quantity and quality of the feed base is 
usually the main factor limiting chicken production, and it is essential to take 
the particular SFRB into account when looking into possible management 
improvements.
It is essential that farmers keep an eye on their chickens
Farmers should be encouraged to monitor the general health of 
their flock and the availability of feed around the house. If the flock is 
generally losing weight or condition, or if there is little feed available 
around the house, then some supplementary feeding may be 
necessary if some birds cannot be sold or consumed. They should 
be advised to keep an eye on young chicks in particular, as these 
will be the first to suffer and can serve as an early warning sign.
45
If a farmer is unsure of which type of feed to provide to supplement the  
SFRB (e.g. more proteins or more carbohydrates), then ‘cafeteria’ feeding  
(see Section 5.6.1) may be worth while. 
5.3 How a chicken digests food
Chickens pick up feed with their beaks (Figure 7). The beak in active birds 
might therefore be blunt, while a long beak might indicate that the bird is not 
feeding well. Food is mixed in the mouth and then swallowed whole (since 
chickens have no teeth). It goes into the crop where it is stored for up to 
18 hours. The crop can be felt at the right side of the neck when it is full.  
The food passes from the crop into the proventriculus where it mixes with 
juices that will help with digestion. It then passes into the gizzard. The gizzard 
is a very muscular organ with hard ridges which, together with small stones 
that the bird has eaten, help to grind up the food for digestion. In the small 
intestine, the food is broken down with digestive enzymes into nutrients that 
are absorbed through the wall of the intestine into the blood. In the large 
intestine, excess water is absorbed from the food. After nutrients and water 
have been taken from the food, the residue passes into the rectum, the 
cloaca and exits via the vent as faeces (droppings).
Birds do not produce liquid urine. Waste from the kidneys forms a thick white 
material (mostly uric acid) which is mixed with the faeces. Both are then 
voided through the cloaca as droppings. 
Figure 7. The internal organs of a chicken, highlighting the digestive tract 
Crop
Cloaca
Vent
Rectum
IntestinesGizzard
Beak
Proventriculus
Chapter 5  Nutrition
46 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
5.4 What chickens need in their feed
Chickens need adequate feed to maintain their condition (e.g. to move 
around, renew their feathers, fight diseases), to grow and to produce 
eggs. Their diet—like the diet of humans—consists of different nutrients: 
carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, minerals, crude fibre and water  
(Table 4).
Table 4. Functions of various nutrients in chicken feed 
Nutrient Function
Carbohydrates To provide energy (e.g. for movement)
To maintain body temperature
[Any surplus is stored as fat reserves (in lipid deposits) in the body]
Fibre To enhance digestion
[Crude fibre is itself poorly digested]
Proteins To replenish the body’s muscles, organs and fluids
To contribute to the growth of feathers, beak and claws
To produce eggs
Fats To provide energy—fats are very high in energy
To maintain body temperature
[Surplus is stored in lipid deposits in the body]
Minerals To build bones
To produce eggshells
To assist in chemical reactions inside the body
Vitamins To maintain the body’s functions
To fight diseases
Water Essential for all body functions
All these nutrients are necessary to provide energy, grow muscles and 
produce eggs. Lack or shortage of a single nutrient may result in poor growth 
or egg production and increased disease problems. The daily feed ration of 
a chicken must therefore contain certain amounts of carbohydrates, proteins, 
fats, vitamins and minerals. To make a balanced diet, these nutrients need 
to be combined in the right ratio, according to the age and productivity of 
the bird. For example, to optimise egg production in commercial layers, the 
chicken’s diet should be moderate in both energy and protein, while a ration 
for commercial broilers should contain higher levels of both energy and 
proteins to optimise the production of lean tissue. Because of their lower rate 
of production, diets for village birds tend to have lower nutrient specifications.
Sources of nutrients include:
•	 Carbohydrate-rich feeds—energy feeds—include maize, sorghum, rice, 
millets, cassava and cooked sweetpotato.
•	 Cereal brans contain moderate levels of energy and fibre. They are a very 
useful, and often cheap, feedstuff for chickens but, because of their fibre 
content, they should not be fed to chickens in large quantities.
47
•	 Protein feeds are primarily classified as being of either animal or  
vegetable origin.
 – Animal products usually have a higher protein content than vegetable 
products, as well as better-quality proteins. Examples of animal 
proteins include fish, meat of various origins, blood, earthworms, 
termites, and other larval and adult insects. Chickens will also eat the 
ticks off cattle lying in cattle corrals. Eggs are an excellent source of 
proteins. If available, a hard-boiled egg can be given to young chicks, 
with an egg a day being sufficient for 6–7 chicks. 
 – Among the sources of vegetable proteins are various legumes (e.g. 
cowpea, pigeon pea, chickpea, mung bean, garden pea, groundnut, 
sunflower seeds, sesame seeds, pumpkin seeds [after removal of the 
outer shell] and coconut). Some legumes (including soybean) contain 
toxic chemicals that must be removed by some form of heat treatment 
before the feed can be consumed. The legumes mentioned above are 
known to have little or no toxicity when eaten raw. Certain fermentation 
processes may improve the protein quality of some beans. Since 
vegetable proteins are of inferior quality, as many as possible should 
be combined in any particular feed (e.g. beans and sunflower seeds 
together provide proteins that are nearly as good as animal proteins). 
Leaf proteins, including those of grasses, are of better quality than 
those in seeds—free-ranging chickens eat a lot of green feed, so when 
they are enclosed their feed should include the leaves they like (e.g. 
the leaves of bean plants, sweetpotato, pumpkin, cassava and certain 
wild herbs that people also use as salads and relishes).
•	 Chickens require, in very small amounts, a wide range of minerals 
including iron, zinc, copper, iodine and manganese. They must get these 
minerals from their feedstuffs and the soil. An important mineral required 
in greater amounts is calcium, which is present in sea and snail shells, 
limestone in the earth and bones (burnt and crushed). Eggshells also 
contain high levels of calcium but they should be roasted before feeding 
to chickens, which will otherwise acquire a taste for eggs and become egg 
eaters. Phosphorus, another essential mineral, is also present in bones 
and certain rocks. People often forget the importance of salt—this can be 
sprinkled in small quantities over any feed given, but too much of it can 
cause diarrhoea.
•	 Vitamins are also required in very small quantities. There are many 
different vitamins, and feeds such as liver, fruits, vegetables and leaves are 
rich sources of them. Other feeds, such as grains and insects, also contain 
vitamins in varying amounts.
All the above nutrients are necessary for optimal production but the 
proportions vary according to age, stage of production, local climate, season 
of the year and other factors. For example, growing chicks need more proteins 
than adult birds. Energy-rich feeds usually form the largest part of the diet 
of chickens (about 60–70%), then come protein-rich feeds, while the various 
Chapter 5  Nutrition
48 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
minerals and vitamins are needed only in very small amounts, except for 
calcium for laying hens—in layers, the formation of the eggshell requires 
higher levels of dietary calcium than those needed for non-laying birds.
5.5 Feed resources
Chickens need sufficient good-quality feed to grow, produce eggs and 
maintain their resistance to diseases. In village chicken systems based on 
scavenging, the feed resource is a critical constraint to the expansion of 
chicken flocks once ND is under control.
The SFRB in a village is generally fully utilised. Village populations of 
scavenging chickens can grow until the SFRB is over-utilised. When the SFRB 
is not sufficient to nourish all birds (as well as other scavenging animals), birds 
less able to compete and fend for themselves, like chicks and growers, are 
the first to starve. Furthermore, the SFRB varies with the different seasons, 
increasing competition for available feed in times of food shortage.
To avoid starvation of chickens, especially young and weaker birds, the flock 
size needs to match the locally available feed resources throughout the year. 
To ensure that this is so, villagers should:
•	 observe their chickens to see that they are not losing weight through lack 
of feed, keeping an eye on young chicks in particular, as they will be the 
first to suffer and can serve as an early warning sign
•	 be aware of their neighbours’ chickens and other scavenging animals 
when calculating the available feed resources
•	 reduce the number of chickens they keep in times of feed shortage
•	 not allow hens to sit on too many eggs, otherwise the chicks that hatch will 
not find enough food
•	 provide supplementary feed when the SFRB is depleted and the number of 
chickens kept cannot be reduced.
In certain circumstances, supplementary feed (either local ingredients or 
commercial feed) can be supplied. The farmer must be aware that extra feed 
must be supplied constantly and permanently when the flock size is too big 
for the birds to receive adequate nutrition from the SFRB. Malnourished birds 
are not productive and are more likely to contract diseases. 
Farmers must decide between providing supplementary feed and reducing the 
flock size. This decision will take into account current and projected levels of 
chick mortality, the cost of feed, the relative returns from sale of chickens and 
eggs in the market, and the value placed on home consumption of eggs.
When flock mortality is reduced and production increases, farmers must 
decide how to deal with a bigger flock. If the SFRB is not sufficient to support 
the flock, then farmers should ask themselves the following questions:
49
•	 Can I afford to keep this many birds at the moment? (factors to consider: 
the money needed to buy feed; the availability of other supplementary 
feed; the time involved in looking after the birds)
•	 Is it better to sell some birds now instead of later? (factors to consider: 
the current price of birds compared with the expected future price; an 
important festival or ceremony coming up, for which many birds will  
be needed)
•	 Is it necessary to keep this many birds or would it be preferable to 
consume more birds and eggs at home?
•	 Should we be selling and eating more eggs rather than hatching so  
many chicks?
Farmers could use the decision-making sequence shown in Figure 8 when 
the SFRB is not sufficient to meet the needs of the flock.
Figure 8.  Decision-making scheme for farmers when the scavenging feed resource 
base is insufficient to meet the needs of their flock
No
No
No
Sell more chickens now.
Go to question 6.
Go to question 6.
Maintain or increase your  
flock and provide 
supplementary feed. 
Sell or eat more chickens and 
eggs or go to question 5.
Sell or eat more chickens 
and eggs now.
Sell or eat more chickens 
and eggs now.
Sell more eggs now and  
go to question 3.
Eat more chickens or eggs 
and/or go to question 4.
yes
yes
yes
yes
No
No
No
yes
yes
1.  Is the current price of chickens 
very high? 
2.  Is the current price of eggs 
very high?     
3.  Can we eat more chickens and 
eggs at home?    
4.  Do I think the price or chickens or 
eggs will increase over the next 
month or two?
5.  Will I need many chickens for 
home use or festivals in the next 
month or two?         
6.  Will the cost (in money and labour) 
of providing supplementary feed be 
offset by the extra profit I can make if  
I keep my chickens for a while longer?
Chapter 5  Nutrition
50 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Remember that relying on commercial feed will take away one of 
the biggest advantages of village chicken production: low input and, 
consequently, low risk.
5.6 Supplementary feeding
Supplementary feeding can be used to increase the productivity of scavenging 
village chickens and to assist the chickens when the SFRB is insufficient to 
allow the whole flock to thrive.
Supplementary feed is just that—a supplement not a replacement—and must 
therefore not distract the chickens from scavenging. In general, it is therefore 
best to offer supplementary feed in the late afternoon before the chickens are 
penned overnight. 
Poorer farmers might find it difficult to regularly supplement their chickens’ 
feed. In such cases, supplementary feed might be provided for only selected 
birds or age groups, such young chicks or laying or brooding hens. If this is 
done, then a way must be devised to separate the selected chickens from the 
flock so that only they have access to the supplementary feed.
what can be used for supplementary feeding?
In general, everything edible can be used for supplementary feeding of 
chickens, but the benefit will be higher when the nutritional needs of the 
chickens are considered.
Chickens that get all their nutrients from scavenging may eat an excess 
of proteins and therefore benefit most from supplemental feeding of 
carbohydrates (e.g. a few handfuls of maize, sorghum or millet). Hens in lay 
can be provided with a diet rich in proteins and some extra crushed mollusc or 
eggshells. These contain calcium, an element necessary for the production of 
the eggshell.
Chickens can be provided with leftovers from household food, as well as 
green feed such as grass, weeds and leaves from garden plants. Bran (the 
seed coat but not the husk) from grains such as rice, maize and wheat 
after polishing is a useful feed ingredient for chickens, containing moderate 
proteins and energy. The outer husks or hulls have little nutritional value. 
Some advice on the provision of supplementary feed:
•	 Feed should always be provided fresh daily rather than being provided in 
one big heap for the chickens to finish over a few days.
•	 Feed should be offered in troughs to avoid mixing with the soil, which 
spoils and contaminates valuable feed. There are various types of feeders 
(Figure 9), the best being those that prevent the chickens from stepping 
onto the feed.
51
Figure 9.  Three types of feed troughs
•	 Feed troughs should always be clean. Remove old feed daily and clean the 
trough before refilling. Feed should never be allowed to become mouldy or 
rotten. Mouldy feeds can cause illness and death of chickens.
•	 Contamination of feedstuff with faeces should be avoided because many 
diseases are spread via the droppings.
•	 Feed should be offered always at the same location so that the chickens 
get used to it. The feeding place should not be easily accessible to 
predators (see Section 4.7.1).
•	 If eggshells are provided, they should be roasted and crushed, so that the 
chickens do not recognise them as part of an egg. Otherwise, they might 
start eating eggs from nests.
•	 Since chicks have very small beaks, feeds such as cereals and beans, as 
well as some of the minerals provided, need to be ground into pieces small 
enough for them to be easily swallowed (but not so fine as to be powdery). 
Leaves and hard-boiled eggs should be finely chopped for chicks. Chicks 
have a very limited capacity to ingest and digest high-fibre feedstuffs.
•	 Some simple procedures may improve the nutritive value and/or 
digestibility of certain feeds. For example, bean or pea seeds should be 
kept moist in a covered container and allowed to germinate before feeding 
them to chicks. Cereal grains can be soaked in water overnight to improve 
their digestibility. Since such materials can become mouldy, it should be 
ensured that the chickens eat them as soon as they are offered.
The suggestions above assume the production of a variety of crops surplus 
to the family’s needs. Farmers will generally increase crop production 
when there is a market for the crop plus products available that they want 
to buy (assuming there is suitable land and weather conditions to increase 
production). Similarly, village chicken farmers may also decide to produce 
more crops for feeding chickens once they see the value of having more meat 
and eggs to eat and sell.
(a) (b) (c)
Chapter 5  Nutrition
52 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
The importance of making clean water always available for chickens cannot 
be overemphasised. Scavenging chickens find much of the water they need 
by themselves, but having extra water available will greatly improve their 
productivity and chances of survival, especially during dry weather. Young 
chicks, in particular, need easy access to clean water. Remember that an 
adult chicken drinks about a quarter of a litre a day, and more when the 
weather is hot. When it is hot, try to keep the water as cool as possible by 
locating it in the shade. Section 5.1 has further information on chickens’ water 
requirements.
5.6.1 Suggestions for producing supplementary feed
Some supplementary feed for chickens can be produced from materials that 
are available from around the house. Although it would be difficult to produce 
enough locally made supplementary feed to support a whole flock of birds 
for any length of time, the suggestions below could provide some extra feed 
during dry times of the year, or for layers or young chicks that would benefit 
most from the extra feed. When preparing feed, remember that birds have no 
teeth and so their feed will be used more efficiently if it is presented in small 
pieces (Figure 10).
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Birds have no teeth and so have difficulty eating large pieces of feed.
53
Sources of carbohydrates
The main sources carbohydrates will be cereals such as rice, maize,  
millet, sorghum and cassava. However, as far as possible, chickens should 
not compete with humans for food. If the family’s own cereal needs have 
been met, a small area of rice, millet or sorghum could also be grown  
for animal feed.
Sources of proteins
Earthworms, and insects such as termites and cockroaches, are good 
sources of proteins. Their presence in chicken-scavenging areas can be 
encouraged in various ways:  
•	 Maize bran mixed with enough water to make it gluggy will attract insects.
•	 Branches, grass and rubbish collected into heaps on the ground will be 
colonised by various types of insects. As required, a heap can be turned 
over and the chickens allowed to scavenge for the insects underneath.  
If a number of heaps are made, one heap of material can be made 
available for the chickens every few days.
•	 Branches and plants that attract termites can also be put into heaps  
and used in a similar way.
•	 If any cows are owned by the family, cow dung can be heaped to  
attract insects.
•	 Discarding dishwashing water and other waste water on an area of earth 
will moisten the soil and attract earthworms, especially in dry weather.
Plants such as leucaena can be grown as another source of proteins. Their 
leaves can be supplied to chickens fresh, or dried and crushed.
Sources of vitamins and minerals
Eggshells and bones can be roasted and crushed to provide a range of 
vitamins and minerals. It is important to roast and crush eggshells so that the 
chickens do not acquire a taste for fresh eggshell.
5.6.2 Cafeteria approach to supplementary feeding
In the ‘cafeteria’ approach, separate plates of feeds that provide concentrated 
sources of proteins, carbohydrates and minerals so that the chickens can 
choose the type of feed they most need (Figure 11). It is desirable to provide 
the feedstuffs in the approximate proportion that they are required. To 
optimise this approach, the approximate composition of the SFRB needs  
to be known (i.e. is it energy or protein deficient?) as do the composition  
and palatability of the feedstuffs provided. Where the protein supplement  
on offer is both reasonably palatable and well balanced in terms of amino 
acids, it should be sufficient to provide a grain (wheat or maize), the protein 
supplement and a source of calcium.
Chapter 5  Nutrition
54 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Figure 11.  Bamboo can be used to make a feed trough to provide proteins, 
carbohydrates and minerals in a cafeteria style.
5.7 Feedstuffs that might be offered to chickens, and their  
 nutrient content
Table 5 lists feedstuffs that can be used for supplementary feeding of 
chickens. Nutrient contents are given in relative terms only, since their 
absolute values might vary according to methods of preparation or processing 
employed. The list is not complete.
5.8 Feeding confined chickens
In general, confining chickens for long periods is not recommended under 
village conditions. Most villages do not have access to a regular supply of 
commercial chicken feed or, if they do, the cost of this feed exceeds the 
returns and increases the risks of raising village chickens. 
Nevertheless, it may sometimes be necessary to confine some or all of the 
flock and, in such instances, providing a commercial chicken feed could be an 
option. Confined birds need to be fed a balanced diet since they are not able 
Mineral
Carbohydrate
Protein
55
Table 5.  Feedstuffs that can be used to provide supplementary feed for chickens, and 
their relative nutrient contents
Feed Carbohydrates Proteins Fats Minerals vitamins
Barley +++ + + + +
Beans +++ +++ + + ++
Bones – – – +++ –
Clover + + + + ++
Eggshells – – – +++ –
Fats of animal origin – – +++ – –
Fish + +++ ++ +++ +++
Fruit + + + +++ +++
Grass + + + + ++
Groundnuts ++ +++ +++ + +
Insects ++ +++ ++ +++ +++
Insect larvae ++ +++ ++ +++ ++
Lupins + +++ + + ++
Maize +++ + + + +
Millet +++ + + + +
Oats +++ + + + +
Peas +++ +++ + + ++
Plant oil – – +++ – –
Potatoes +++ + – + +
Rapeseed ++ +++ + ++ ++
Rice +++ + + + +
Rye +++ + – + +
Snail shells – – – +++ –
Sorghum grain +++ + + + +
Soybeansa ++ +++ +++ + ++
Sunflower seed + +++ + ++ +
Termites ++ +++ ++ +++ +++
Tree and plant leaves + + – +++ +++
Wheat +++ ++ + ++ +
Worms ++ +++ ++ +++ +++
a Soybean feeds for chickens are heat treated to inactivate inhibitors. 
 Untreated soybean feeds can be poisonous to chickens. 
+++  high content
++ medium content
+ low content 
– none
Chapter 5  Nutrition
56 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
to satisfy their needs by scavenging. Any imbalance or mistake in the ration 
offered will lead to a drop in productivity and perhaps disease and death of 
the birds. Birds should be given the diet appropriate for their age and stage of 
production: layers should not be given chick or grower diets, and chicks and 
growers should not be given layer diets. 
If a reliable source of commercial feed cannot be obtained, or if the cost of this 
feed is too high, then a feed ration can be made at home. Care needs to be 
taken to produce a balanced ration. Feed could also be offered cafeteria style, 
as described in Section 5.6.2. 
Another point to consider is that chickens need a few days to become 
accustomed to any new diet. When changing from a scavenging diet to 
commercial or other supplied feed, or vice versa, the ration should be changed 
gradually by offering a mixture of the existing and the new feed for some days.
Some advice on providing feed to confined chickens
•	 If possible, offer commercial feed to confined chickens.
•	 The most important group of birds to offer supplementary feeding to is 
young chicks from hatch until about 2 weeks of age. 
•	 A village-type hen needs about 75 g of commercial layer feed per day (1 kg 
per 13 hens per day). Commercial layers require approximately 100 g/day.
•	 Buy feed that is designed for the type of birds held (e.g. chick starter for 
young layer or indigenous breed chicks to 6 weeks of age, layer mash for 
laying hens and, depending on their age, starter or grower broiler mash for 
broilers).
•	 Do not abruptly change the type of feed provided.
•	 Provide fresh feed daily to avoid contamination and spoiling.
•	 The trough must be big (long) enough to allow all chickens to feed at the 
same time. If the trough is too small, weak birds that are low in the pecking 
order might be pushed away.
•	 Prevent birds from sitting in or scratching in the trough. The trough should 
have a lip as well as a wire mesh grid to prevent food spillage. The food is 
expensive and waste should be kept to a minimum.
•	 Full troughs lead to spilt feed.
•	 Clean the trough regularly.
•	 Offer fresh water to the chickens daily.
•	 Store chicken feed safely away from rodents and wild birds to avoid 
losses and contamination. (Rodents and wild birds might carry infectious 
diseases.)
57
6 Flock management
6.1 Keeping the flock healthy and productive
Every chicken farmer aims to keep their chickens healthy and productive, 
to benefit from the flock in terms of meat and egg production. One major 
step towards increased productivity is to vaccinate against ND, the most 
devastating disease of chickens in many regions. Other diseases can also 
be controlled or limited in their effects (see Part 3) and improved housing 
(Chapter 4) and nutrition (Chapter 5) will help keep the chickens in good 
condition. The benefits from these actions can be augmented by good flock 
management.
Flock management aims to maintain a healthy and productive chicken 
flock throughout the year by choosing an adequate flock size and taking 
off any surplus in a way that is most beneficial to the chicken owner. Flock 
management also includes control of breeding and egg production to increase 
the output of eggs and chicks per hen.
Village chicken production is characterised by low inputs and outputs, 
many farmers selling or eating their chickens only when the need arises. 
However, once ND vaccination is implemented and/or other killer diseases are 
controlled, more chickens will survive. Consequently, the following possibilities 
emerge: 1. the breeder flock size can be allowed to increase; 2. surplus 
chickens surviving can be marketed or consumed prior to maturity; 3. fewer 
eggs can be set under the hens, allowing more eggs to be consumed or sold; 
4. various combinations of 1–3. The scavenging feed resource base (see 
sections 2.4 and 5.2) will probably not support a significant increase in flock 
size within a village (1. and 2. above), which means that farmers will need to 
plan and manage their flocks more carefully. Good planning and management 
will help to maximise the benefits of increased chicken production and 
minimise any other problems that may arise once ND is controlled.
Farmers need to plan well in advance to get as much benefit as possible 
from their vaccinated flocks.
Possible negative effects that may occur once Nd and other killer 
diseases are controlled include that:
•	 an increasing number of chickens might not find enough feed in the local 
environment
•	 other diseases (e.g. fowl pox) might become more prominent and 
important
•	 the supply of chickens and eggs to local markets may increase, resulting 
in a drop in prices received.
Extension staff can assist farmers to plan and manage their chicken 
production so as to minimise the above effects.
58 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Case study
In the Mtwara Region in southern Tanzania a successful ND 
vaccination program has resulted in the price of village chickens 
increasing in the markets. Whereas previously farmers would sell 
their chickens at any price before an expected outbreak of ND, they 
are now more confident that their birds will survive. Farmers have 
become reluctant to sell their birds and are asking and obtaining a 
higher price from traders. The traders can also be more confident 
that the birds they purchase will not die from ND before they get 
them to market.
6.2 Flock size
Encouraged by the benefits of successful ND vaccination, farmers may be 
tempted to expand flock size. Farmers must consider the available feed 
resources (and the cost of supplemental feed if required), the family work 
capacity and the stocking density before making a decision. They should ask 
themselves the following questions:
•	 Will all chickens find sufficient nourishment from the feed in the 
surrounding area? (Be aware that many other farmers may be increasing 
their flocks at the same time.) 
•	 Does the person who is looking after the chickens have enough time to 
take care of a larger number of birds?
•	 Is the chicken house, or the place where the birds are kept at night, big 
enough for the whole flock?
6.2.1 Feed resources
‘Feed resources’ refers to the feed available for scavenging around the house 
and village. In scavenging systems the feed resource must therefore be 
considered as probably the most significant constraint to expansion of chicken 
flocks once ND is under control (see Section 5.5)
6.2.2 Family work capacity
This manual contains suggestions for a range of possible interventions to 
improve the productivity of chicken flocks. Most of these interventions require 
at least a little extra labour (e.g. cleaning the chicken house, providing nests, 
feeding young chicks, treating hens for external parasites etc.). When the 
flock size increases, the time consumed by these activities will also increase. 
When a family considers keeping more chickens, they should make sure that 
there is a family member who will be responsible for the chickens and who 
has enough time to look after them properly. A small chicken flock that is 
carefully looked after will bring more benefits to its owners than a big 
flock that is neglected.
59
6.2.3 Stocking density
A high stocking density is likely to cause problems in a chicken flock. 
Chickens will fight more often to establish their ranking within the flock and 
they will compete for all resources (such as feed, water, nests and sleeping 
places). Infectious diseases might also spread easier and faster within a 
crowded chicken flock. Conditions related to poor husbandry or nutrition 
are also likely to be aggravated with an increasing number of chickens. For 
example, the amount of droppings (i.e. manure) increases with chicken 
numbers. Increasing quantities of droppings in the chicken house can 
increase the risk of transmission of parasitic worms and coccidia. Excessive 
amounts of moist droppings can also cause ‘bad air’ in the chicken house, 
which promotes the development of respiratory diseases.
If the flock size is increased, a farmer should ensure that:
•	 there is enough space in the chicken house for all birds
•	 there are enough nests for all hens
•	 all chickens can feed at once if supplementary feed is provided
•	 someone can remove droppings regularly from inside and below the 
chicken house
•	 there are not too many roosters (to avoid fighting).
A farmer would be well advised to increase flock size only gradually 
as they gain experience in managing and feeding the birds. Given the 
limitations of the SFRB, especially in low-rainfall areas or during the dry 
seasons, farmers should be encouraged to maintain a nucleus flock of not 
more than 15–20 adult breeding birds (the actual number will depend on 
local conditions). Even if supplementary feed is available, they should, rather 
than build up large flocks, eat or sell the surplus eggs or chickens of inferior 
breeding quality. Neighbours should also be encouraged to keep smaller 
flocks so that the feed available in the village can be shared equitably.
6.3 General hygiene
The saying that ‘Prevention is better than cure’ is very appropriate. Although 
there are limited possibilities to improve chicken hygiene under rural village 
conditions, being aware of the need to maintain general cleanliness for 
chickens will certainly help. Here are a few procedures that farmers should 
find easy to carry out:
•	 Clean the chicken house regularly, both inside and outside. Remove 
droppings and rubbish and replace worn and dirty perches when 
necessary.
•	 Put ash on the floor and treat the wooden parts with old engine oil to help 
reduce the number of external parasites. For the same reason, fumigating 
the chicken house with smoke two or three times a year is a good practice. 
If lime-wash is available, the walls can be painted with it.
Chapter 6  Flock management
60 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
•	 Bury or burn birds that die, otherwise they remain a source of infection for 
healthy birds. If there is a good pit latrine, not yet too full, dead birds can 
be disposed of by throwing them into it.
•	 Kill and bury chickens that appear very sick, so that they do not infect 
others. If many birds in the flock have been sick and died, the old chicken 
house should be burnt and a new one built on a different site.
•	 Do not immediately return to the family flock chickens that have been sent 
away to market and have not sold. They may well have come into contact 
with disease-carrying birds. If they cannot be killed and eaten, they should 
be isolated for at least 14 days before they are returned to the flock.
•	 Be on the lookout for traditional, local treatments for chickens. As  
most rural people know, many plants have medicinal value. Some  
local remedies that are used to treat humans could also be effective  
for chickens. For example, medicines used to treat intestinal worms in  
children will probably have the same effect in chickens—at least they  
could be tried out on a small sample first.  
•	 Use locally available plants that have been shown to assist in lowering 
infestations of external parasites (lice, fleas, mites, ticks).  
•	 Work with other poultry farmers in the community to encourage hygienic 
practices throughout the village. As village poultry can roam throughout 
the village, the best way to have healthy birds is to make the village 
environment a healthy one.
•	 Do not introduce new birds into a flock when there is active disease in the 
village or surrounding area.
•	 Keep all new birds separated for 14 days before allowing them to mix with 
the existing flock.
6.4 Laying, brooding and hatching
Proper management of laying hens will improve their productivity through 
increases in egg production and the number of clutches per year, and in the 
hatching rate.
6.4.1 Laying hens
In villages, hens start to lay eggs when they are about 5–6 months of age. 
Malnutrition or poor health condition in growers will result in the birds coming 
into lay later and producing fewer eggs.
In uncontrolled conditions (i.e. no active management), a hen lays about 10–
15 eggs, usually on consecutive days (called a clutch), before she becomes 
broody and sits on the eggs to incubate them. After about 21 days she will 
hatch out an average of 8–12 chicks. She then repeats this, on average, three 
or four times a year.
61
Not all eggs laid are necessary for producing future generations. Some hens 
may lay 20 or more eggs in a clutch, but a small village hen cannot adequately 
cover so many eggs, and can only properly look after a maximum of 8–10 
chicks (especially in colder weather or when the SFRB is poor). A hen may 
also abandon her nest with all the eggs in it. This is a waste of a very valuable 
protein or income source for the family. In addition, eggs left in nests are 
repeatedly being heated and cooled as hens leave and return daily to lay more 
eggs. This can cause early embryo mortality. 
One simple intervention is to collect eggs from the nests at least twice a day 
(preferably when no hen is on the nest). Always leave at least one egg in the 
nest to encourage the hen to continue using that nest. By taking eggs from a 
hen that is not yet brooding, you will stimulate the hen to produce more eggs, 
as the hen will always try to complete the clutch before starting to brood. If a 
hen is eating well, she may lay as many as 25 eggs before becoming broody.
Good-quality eggs for brooding
Some farmers may wish to have more control over the quality of 
eggs. If so, the following procedure could be adopted. All eggs laid 
on a particular day could be marked with a letter or number (e.g.  
1 for Sunday, 2 for Monday etc.) or the date (including the eggs that 
are left on the nest). Thus, the farmer will know which eggs are the 
freshest. The most recently laid one or two eggs should be left in the 
nest each day to encourage the hens to continue laying. Once a hen 
becomes broody, and if the owner wants her to produce chicks, a 
number of fresh, fertile eggs can be selected from those in storage 
and placed under the broody hen (see Section 6.4.2).
Some people believe that taking eggs from the nest may cause a hen to 
abandon it—this may occur, but is rare. If the farmer is removing several eggs 
from a nest that already has a good number present, especially when the hen 
is broody and sitting, this should be done in the evening when it is dark. It may 
also help to dust your hands with wood ash before collecting eggs so as not 
to leave a human smell on the eggs.
If a farmer has a problem with hens laying their eggs in remote, inaccessible 
nests, they should keep the hens in their house with nests for a few days for 
part of the morning (until about 10 or 11 o’clock) to help break this habit, as 
most eggs are laid before midday.
Laying hens can be identified in the following ways:
•	 Check the width of the bones around the vent (Figure 12). With non-laying 
birds, only one finger can be placed between the two pubic or ‘pin’ bones 
and two fingers between the pin and breast bones. Laying hens can have 
a space of two to three fingers between the pin bones and four to five 
fingers between the pin and breast bones—depending on the size of the 
chickens and size of your fingers. 
Chapter 6  Flock management
62 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Figure 12.  Two to three fingers can be placed between the pin bones on laying 
hens (a); in non-laying birds, only two fingers can be placed between  
the pin and breast bones (b).
(b)
(a)
Pin bones
Pin bone
Pin bone
Breats bone
63
•	 Look at the comb. Adult hens with a very small and pale comb are not 
in lay and are probably either moulting or in poor health. If hens in poor 
health do not recover they should be separated from the flock, since they 
are not productive and may transmit disease to the healthy birds. A small, 
pale comb is normal in moulting birds. 
•	 Look at the vent. A non-laying hen has a puckered vent while a layer has  
a large, oval, moist and bleached vent.
The following are some other steps that farmers can take in looking after 
laying hens:
•	 To ensure a high fertility rate in eggs, a flock should have one rooster for 
every 10–15 hens, plus one extra rooster in the flock in case the other gets 
hurt or dies. So if a farmer has 10 hens then there should be two males, and 
if they have 20 hens, they should keep three (not four) roosters. If there are 
too many roosters, they will fight and fertility will not improve. If an egg has 
not been fertilised by a rooster, then no chick will hatch (Figure 13).
(a) (b)
Figure 13.  A chick is produced when a hen has mated with a rooster before 
laying the egg (a). If the hen has not mated with a rooster, then the 
egg will not develop into a chick (b).
Chapter 6  Flock management
64 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
•	 When a hen is about to lay, she looks for a quiet, safe and dark place  
to lay the eggs. Hens tend to lay their eggs in places where there 
are already eggs. For this reason, several hens sometimes use one 
‘community’ nest;
•	 It is advisable to provide sufficient nests for all hens in a flock, to avoid  
hens choosing places for nesting where the eggs cannot be found,  
are exposed to bad weather, or are easily accessible to predators  
(see Section 4.6).
•	 Eggs that are removed from the original nest chosen by the hen and  
then placed in another nest may be rejected by the hen.
•	 Hens lay the most eggs during their first year in production. Thereafter, 
production decreases rapidly, especially after the second year of age. 
Thus, to ensure a high level of egg production in a flock, hens should  
not be kept for longer than 2 years.
•	 Identify the hens that produce many eggs. Also, watch how well they  
sit on their eggs and how well they raise their chicks. This will help the 
farmer to choose which hens make the best mothers. Keep the pullets 
produced by hens which are good layers and which show good  
mothering ability as replacement stock.
•	 It is important for farmers to observe their hens and note which are  
the better layers. The ones that lay few or no eggs should be culled  
(i.e. eaten or sold).
Under village conditions, a hen produces 3–4 clutches per year on average. 
Laying eggs takes about 2 weeks and brooding another 3 weeks. The hen 
will then take care of her chicks for about 8–12 weeks before she starts to lay 
eggs again. If feed availability and predation are not a concern, chicks can be 
separated from hens at around 6 weeks of age to encourage the hen to come 
back into lay more quickly.
6.4.2 Brooding and hatching
Once a clutch of eggs is laid, village hens usually become broody. (They sit on 
the nests for most of the day and may even sleep there. They are aggressive 
and make a characteristic squawk when approached.) A broody hen will 
incubate the eggs and then look after the chicks that hatch. She sits on the 
eggs for 21 days, leaving the nest for only short periods to get feed and water. 
A hen can lose a lot of weight while she is incubating the eggs. Ensure that 
water and some supplementary feed are nearby to minimise this effect. Since 
she has depleted her calcium reserves to lay the clutch of eggs, it is important 
to also provide her with a good source of calcium during this period to build 
up her bones and to encourage her to commence laying as soon as possible 
after rearing her chicks. If the hen has to leave the nest for long periods to 
look for feed and water, the eggs may cool down excessively, resulting in poor 
hatchability and chick survival.
65
To test that the hen is definitely broody and will not abandon the nest, the 
farmer can put two or three old eggs under her. If she stays on the nest for  
2 or 3 days, it indicates that she is truly broody. The old eggs can then be 
taken away in the evening when it is dark and replaced with 8–12 of the  
fresh, stored eggs. Very small or very large eggs should not be set—choose 
well-shaped, strong-shelled eggs. Do not set eggs from very young hens,  
as these usually do not hatch well.
The farmer should control the number of hens that are allowed to hatch eggs at 
any one time. The most favourable time is when there is more feed available for 
the hen and her chicks (harvest time or when the SFRB is rich) and when the 
weather is not too hot or too cold. It should also be taken into account that in 
some areas the hens lay eggs and go broody only at certain times of the year.
If the farmer does not want a broody hen to hatch eggs she can be placed in a 
small, separate cage in a cool, shady place. Keep the cage off the ground and 
cover the floor with wire or small branches to allow good air circulation. Make 
sure the hen has water and feed. In a few days she will lose her broodiness 
and after a while will start laying again.
If possible, it is good practice to separate a broody hen from other birds so 
that she is not disturbed while incubating her eggs. However, if this means  
that the nest must be moved, it may well lead to the hen abandoning the nest. 
So the move needs to be done carefully, preferably at night.
After 21 days of brooding, the chicks will hatch. Note the following points  
at hatching:
•	 Do not disturb a hen during hatching, because low temperature and/or low 
humidity have a negative effect on the hatching rate.
•	 Discard the eggs if a hen has been sitting on them for longer than 21 days. 
To make sure that the eggs do not contain living embryos, they are best 
candled before discarding (see Section 6.4.3)
•	 Hatching might take longer if the hen cannot completely cover all the eggs 
with her body, or when the clutch consists of eggs from different hens. In 
this case, the hen may abandon the eggs that are not already hatched to 
look after the newly hatched chicks. If an owner is concerned about this, 
they could remove dry chicks from the hen and keep them in a warm and 
safe place until the evening, when all of the chicks have hatched.
6.4.3 Candling eggs
Candling will provide information on whether an embryo is developing inside 
the fertilised egg and whether this embryo is alive. To check whether a chick is 
developing inside an egg you can hold the egg in front of a bright light (e.g. a 
paraffin lamp, a candle, a torch or a light bulb; Figure 14) inside a dark room. 
Candling can be done at about day 6–8 after a hen has started brooding a 
clutch to determine fertility and once again around day 17–18 to identify viable 
eggs and those containing dead embryos or bacterial rots. Eggs containing 
Chapter 6  Flock management
66 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
bacterial rots and dead embryos should be discarded as they are a potential 
source of infection for the hatching chicks. White eggs are easier to examine 
than brown eggs. 
Figure 14.  Eggs can be candled using a lamp (a) or a torch with a paper funnel adjusted 
to give a tight fit around the egg (b).
At 6–8 days you can see the shadow of the embryo, which might move in 
response to the light, as well as a fine net of blood vessels (Figure 15a). Eggs 
in which no embryo is developing are completely clear and may be removed 
and used for cooking. (Place the eggs in water first to ensure that they are not 
bad—good eggs will remain on the bottom of the container while bad 
eggs will 
float). In a fertile egg after 9–10 days of incubation (Figure 15a and b), the clear 
air cell in the blunt end of the egg takes up about one quarter of the volume 
of the egg, and the embryo, its membranes and fluids fill the remainder of the 
egg, allowing almost no light to pass through. There is a clear line separating 
the embryo etc. from the air cell.  
development of a chick inside the egg
Within 2 days of brooding the head and body of the embryo form. 
Fine blood vessels can be seen when candling the egg. From day 3, 
the chick’s heart starts to beat. By day 7 of brooding, feathers, beak, 
head and stomach can be seen on the embryo (Figure 15a and 
b). At day 15, only a little albumen remains inside the egg and the 
plumage is complete. By day 19, the chick and the remaining yolk 
fill the egg completely. Shortly before hatching, the egg yolk is pulled 
into the chicks’ abdomen via the navel to form the ‘yolk sac’. The 
chick then starts to pick the eggshell just below the air cell using the 
‘beak tooth’ which looks like a small thorn on the tip of its top beak.
Paper sheet 
rolled into  
a cylinder
Torch
Egg
(a) (b)
67
Figure 15.  Drawings of a chick embryo developing inside an egg. The illustrations 
in (a) represent the development of embryos from day 0 to day 6 and  
day 10, as seen when candling an egg. The embryo in (b) has been 
developing for approximately 9 days.
(a)
Day 10Day 6Day 0
Embryo
Blood vessels
(b)
Embryo
Amniotic cavity 
and fluid
Albumen
Allantoic 
cavity and 
fluid
Yolk sac
Air cell
Chapter 6  Flock management
68 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
6.5 Raising young chicks
Newcastle disease is a major cause of chick mortality, but chicks are also the 
age group most vulnerable to other diseases, predators, and environmental 
and nutritional problems. Although the local breeds of chicken are much better 
at mothering their chicks than exotic breeds, there are still many situations 
in a village that are beyond the mother hen’s control. For this reason, newly 
hatched chicks need special care during their first 4–5 weeks of life. If extra 
care is given for these first few weeks, then there is a much greater chance 
that the birds will survive and grow into healthy, productive adults.
6.5.1 Feeding and nutrition
Young chicks have a limited ability to scavenge for feed and they can expend 
a large amount of energy just to find enough feed to survive. However, 
confinement of chicks for 2–6 weeks can be costly and labour intensive. An 
alternative is to provide a small amount of supplementary feed to young chicks 
and allow them to scavenge for most of the day with the hen.
To provide extra water or supplementary feed specifically for young chicks, a 
small enclosure that chicks but not adults can enter, can be used for feeding. 
This is called ‘creep feeding’ (Figure 16).
 
Figure 16.  A creep feeder can provide a small quantity of feed specifically for chicks 
and not adult birds. This is useful when the quantity of feed available is 
limited. Clean water should also be readily available.
Clean, fresh water should be provided in a trough appropriate for young 
chicks (Figure 17). The trough should be low enough for the chicks to drink 
the water easily without getting wet or drowning, and have a broad base to 
prevent it from being tipped over. Pebbles may be placed in the trough when 
the chicks are very small. 

69
Figure 17. A low, shallow water trough containing a small volume of fresh water is 
appropriate for both chicks and adult birds. 
what can be offered to young chicks for supplementary feeding?
A range of feedstuffs available from village resources can be used to 
supplement the diet of young chicks. Such feedstuffs include leftover food, 
maize meal, maize (corn), rice, cereals, green leaves, worms, and a range of 
insects and their larvae. In addition, it may be possible to utilise materials such 
as dried leaves from shrub legumes, cowpeas or pigeon peas, which could be 
specifically planted around houses. If available, a hard-boiled egg chopped 
into small pieces can also be offered to very young chicks.
Maize, rice and other grains should be crushed or pounded before being 
offered to young chicks, to enhance their digestibility. Soaking crushed 
maize in water for a short time before offering it to chicks will also enhance its 
digestibility. 
If a farmer is reluctant to provide grains that could otherwise be used by the 
family, then the bran left over after milling could be given. Bran is not an ideal 
supplement for chicks, however, because it has a high fibre content and 
only moderate levels of proteins and energy. Young chicks have very limited 
capacity to cope with high-fibre feedstuffs.
Chapter 6  Flock management
70 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
what feed should be given to confined chicks?
If the chicks are confined for the first 2–3 weeks, their diet should contain  
an appropriate mixture of energy, proteins, vitamins and minerals (see  
Chapter 5—Nutrition), such as maize bran, crushed maize or wheat plus 
shrub legumes, fruit or any other green feed. This diet can be enriched  
with protein by offering termites or other insects to the chicks. A hard-boiled 
egg chopped into small pieces might also be added to the ration from time  
to time. The overall diet should contain more than 20% proteins and, because 
of limitations as to how much birds can physically ingest, the energy level 
should also be moderately high (>11.7 megajoules of metabolisable  
energy per kg).
Chicks may be fed household leftovers but problems may occur if the  
feed contains too much salt (sodium chloride). High levels of salt will result  
in watery droppings. The overall diet should not contain more than about  
0.3% salt.
If commercial feed is available and affordable, small quantities can be 
provided to avoid malnutrition in young birds, including those that scavenge 
with the hen for all or part of the day. One kilogram of a good-quality 
commercial chick starter feed will be enough to feed a clutch of 10 chicks for 
the first 10–12 days of life. If feed is bought for chicks it should be especially 
designed for this age group. Do not feed layer mash to young chicks, because 
the nutritional needs of laying hens differ greatly from the needs of young 
chicks that still have to grow. If commercial feed is provided to give young 
chicks a good start, do not change the diet abruptly. Mix the feed they have 
been eating for a few days with the feed they are to be offered in future, to 
allow the chicks’ digestive systems time to adapt and also to accommodate 
differences in palatability. Otherwise they may stop eating, or the new feed 
may cause diarrhoea.
Remember to always provide clean water to confined chicks.
when confining chicks remember:
•	 Confined chicks need to be fed a balanced diet daily.
•	 Chicks in free-range systems need their mother hen to teach  
them how to survive. If chicks are confined to protect them during  
their first days of life, the mother hen should be confined with them.  
For the chicks to learn scavenging, the whole family should be set  
free after no longer than 2 weeks confinement.
•	 After being confined for some time, chicks need supplementary  
feeding for a few more days until they have learnt how to survive  
from scavenging. This can be supplied through creep feeding.
71
6.5.2 Protection from diseases
The following steps should be taken to minimise exposure of chicks  
to diseases:
•	 Nests should be cleaned before or after each clutch to minimise the  
risk of infection.
•	 Brooding hens should be treated against fleas and other  
external parasites, to avoid infestation of newly hatched chicks  
(see Section 11.6).
•	 Blood-sucking external parasites are very harmful to young chicks,  
which should be regularly checked for infestation with external  
parasites (especially fleas and mites) and treated as soon as an infestation 
is noticed. 
•	 If possible, hens with young chicks should be housed separately from the 
flock (especially where elevated houses prevent chicks from entering). 
Avoiding close contact with other birds by keeping them separate 
overnight also decreases the risk of infectious diseases that might spread 
from the older chickens to the young chicks.
•	 Prevent chicks from scavenging in places where there are many droppings 
from adult chickens. These droppings might contain coccidia, which can 
cause severe disease in the chicks (see Section 11.4).
•	 Since nutritional, environmental and other factors (see Figure 22 in 
Chapter 8) directly affect the chicken’s health status, good husbandry is 
especially important for young chicks, which are not used to coping with 
harsh conditions.
6.5.3 Protection from predators
The best way to protect chicks from predators is to keep the young  
birds in a pen. However, this is not always practical in an extensive  
production system, because confined chickens need to be offered feed  
and water regularly.
•	 To decrease the risk of predation, extra feed and water can be provided 
for chicks near the home so that they do not roam too far. Offering feed 
under a roof or tree, for example, will help to hide young chicks from avian 
predators such as eagles and hawks.
•	 Hens with young chicks should be housed at night to protect the chicks 
and their mothers from predators and harsh conditions.
•	 Where chicks are confined, it is important to ensure that the house  
and/or cage is constructed in a way (see Chapter 4) that keeps out  
snakes, rodents and other predators. Internal feeders and waterers  
are preferable, and the spacing between the wire or bamboo slats  
on the cage is very important in preventing access by snakes and  
other predators.
Chapter 6  Flock management
72 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
6.6 Breeding
Although village chickens are not as productive as commercial chickens,  
ue to suboptimal housing, management and feeding, their genetic potential 
is rarely fully exploited. The village chicken is arguably the best bird for the 
conditions existing in rural villages and, in the vast majority of situations,  
it is not advisable to introduce exotic breeds at this stage (even if such are 
readily available). The productivity of indigenous chickens can be significantly 
improved over time by selecting only the healthiest males and females with  
the best production and conformation for breeding purposes. Using the  
existing chicken breeds and strains will also mean that they will retain their 
ability to survive under harsh conditions.
Remember that village chickens have many advantages over commercial birds. 
They are easiest to look after; are more resistant to many common diseases; can 
survive better under difficult conditions; know how to scavenge for their feed; are 
good at brooding, hatching and raising their young; and have better camouflage 
and capacity to escape predators (including the ability to fly).
Interbreeding between closely related birds can be avoided by obtaining, by 
purchase or exchange about once every 2 years, chickens (especially males) 
from more distant villages. The farmer should make sure there is no disease 
present in the chickens and should keep them isolated from the rest of the flock 
for at least 14 days after they are obtained. 
It is important to maintain the correct mating ratios; that is, not have too many 
or too few males for the number of hens. The general guide is to have one 
rooster for every 10 hens, plus one extra rooster (in case one gets hurt or dies). 
So if a farmer has 10 hens, there should be two males, or if they have 20 hens, 
they should keep three roosters.
Breeding aims to increase productivity by using the best available genetic 
material to produce offspring. To achieve this, only birds that perform well 
should be allowed to mate, while other birds should be culled from the flock. 
When selecting birds for breeding, farmers should look for chickens that:
•	 are healthy and robust
•	 grow and produce well with the feed available
•	 have well-developed breast muscles (especially in roosters)
•	 have a deep, rounded body (especially in hens)
•	 are neither too big nor too small
•	 are confident and healthy (even showing signs of aggressiveness in the male)
•	 have lively eyes and a full, red, moist-looking comb
•	 are fast growing
•	 are good egg producers
•	 have a good hatching rate
•	 have good mothering skills.
73
Younger hens have better productive ability and fertility but birds that are  
more than 2 years old may still be used for breeding if they have desirable 
genetic characteristics. If the farmer wants to introduce the naked neck or 
frizzled feather genes into the flock, then male birds with these characteristics 
should be used. Naked neck and frizzled birds have been shown to be  
more tolerant of high temperatures. Birds showing any inherited disorder 
should be culled. 
Different breeds of village chickens have been recognised in many countries. 
In Tanzania, for example, at least four distinct ecotypes/breeds have been 
recognised (Table 6), and in northern Laos, farmers also recognise four 
different types of local chickens—the large chicken (gai yok), the medium 
chicken (gai lat), the dwarf chicken (gai jeh) and the fighting cock (gai tee).
Table 6.  Characteristics of different breeds of local chicken in Tanzania (Buza and 
Mwamuhehe 2001) 
breed/type Characteristics
Kuchi or Kuza Short beak with few feathers; heavy with good meat; lays few eggs (7–10) 
per clutch; 4 months laying interval; mature size big; much preferred due to 
its size and weight
Poni or Kishingo Small; lower weight; many feathers; lays up to 20 eggs per clutch; good 
mothering ability; 4 months laying interval
Mbuni Moderately large; no tail; lays up to 15 eggs; laying interval 3–4 months; 
more vulnerable to diseases
Tongwe or 
Msumbiji
Short and stout; small and of low weight; lays about 20 eggs per clutch; 
good mothering ability; preferred by producers but not buyers because of 
small size; laying interval 3–4 months
6.6.1 Introduction of exotic breeds
In commercial chicken production systems, productivity is increased by 
introducing better-performing breeds. Some of these ‘improved breeds’ are 
also promoted for improving village chicken production. Before introducing 
these more productive birds into a village flock the following points should be 
considered:
•	 Low productivity of local breeds is related to poor nutritional and 
husbandry conditions as well as a lower genetic potential. Under optimal 
conditions, even village chickens will perform better.
•	 The harsh conditions of most village chicken production systems will not 
allow ‘improved breeds’ to perform as well as they would in commercial 
systems, even if they are afforded special care.
•	 Village chickens are adapted to harsh environmental conditions such as 
scavenging for feed, being exposed to various diseases, and hiding and 
flying to escape from predators. Exotic breeds have been developed for 
commercial systems and are accustomed to high-quality feed and regular 
health care. They are more susceptible to diseases and predators and are 
Chapter 6  Flock management
74 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
not as good at scavenging for feed. Exotic breeds will therefore need more 
care than traditional breeds. They will need more supplementary feeding, 
provision of water and proper housing, and protection against predators.
•	 Commercial breeds are very likely to be more susceptible to local 
diseases, whereas village chickens, over the generations, have adapted  
to cope with a number of diseases and parasites.
•	 Commercial hens often make poor mothers. Many breeds do not go 
broody and hence will not sit on the nest to hatch eggs. After their chicks 
have hatched, the mother may not know how to teach them to scavenge  
for feed and may not care for the chicks.
•	 Better-performing birds are often sold as chicks from 1 day to 6 weeks of 
age. Young chicks are more vulnerable to poor conditions than are adult 
birds and more likely to suffer under them. 
•	 Comparisons between the egg production of commercial layers and 
indigenous hens are often misrepresented by not accounting for the 
extended period of time that the village hen spends hatching the eggs  
and caring for the brood of chicks before she recommences laying.
For these reasons, if a farmer wishes to introduce exotic breeds into the flock 
they should consider the following suggestions:
•	 Do not buy young chicks unless you have experience in raising  
motherless chicks.
•	 Buy only healthy-looking birds.
•	 Determine if the birds have been sexed. There is little or no value in 
purchasing culled, layer strain male chicks.
•	 Ask the seller how the chickens have been kept (housing, feeding) and 
whether the birds have been vaccinated (especially against ND).
•	 Keep the new chickens separate from the village flock at first (for  
14 days if possible) to prevent them from getting sick with any disease  
that might occur in the village flock and to confirm that the new birds 
are disease free.
•	 If chickens are used to being confined they will not know how to  
scavenge or protect themselves from predators. For this reason, newly 
acquired birds of commercial breeds have to gradually get used to the 
free-range system. They should be kept confined and fed commercial  
feed for 3 weeks before being allowed to move around in a fenced area 
and gradually given more locally produced supplementary feed. They  
can then be given longer periods of freedom to scavenge for feed over 
another 1–2 weeks. Interbreed the improved breeds with the local  
breeds as soon as possible, so as to gain some of the benefits of  
both breeds in the offspring. This needs to be done initially on a small 
number of birds to ensure that the resultant stock have desirable  
qualities and do not possess unwanted characteristics.
75
6.6.2 Meat production versus egg production
Purposeful breeding aims to get either more eggs or more meat. Big chickens 
with thick breast muscles often produce fewer eggs because they convert the 
feed into muscle rather than eggs. Similarly, good egg producers are usually 
smaller because they convert more feed into eggs rather than into muscle. The 
maintenance requirements of large birds are also greater than for small birds.
If breeding aims to increase egg production, more emphasis should be put on 
the reproductive and mothering performance of the hens, while breeding for 
meat production should focus mainly on characteristics of rapid growth and size.
If a farmer intends to ‘improve’ their flock with exotic breeds, they have to 
decide whether to introduce birds known for good egg production or for 
good meat production. However, some improved breeds are known as 
‘dual-purpose breeds’, which means the birds are bigger than average (with 
more meat) and produce a good number of eggs as well. They do not grow 
quite as large as the purely meat breeds and do not produce quite as many 
eggs as the purely egg breeds, but are somewhere in between the two.
whether or not exotic breeds are introduced, the farmer should be 
encouraged to always select the best birds for breeding within their flock 
and eat or sell chickens with low production.
6.7 Meat production (sale and consumption)
A healthy and productive chicken flock has the capacity to increase in 
numbers and allow the off-take of more birds for consumption, sale, barter 
and other purposes. Depending on the availability and cost of feed for the 
additional birds, chicken farmers should have more money available for 
essential household expenses, and will improve their family’s diet by making 
more chicken meat and eggs available for consumption.
In certain areas, there are traditions restricting the consumption of chickens 
and eggs. These traditions may gradually change as production starts to 
improve. Extension staff can also assist by promoting the consumption of 
chicken meat and eggs. The nutritional value of chicken meat should be 
promoted, as well as the value of eating chickens and eggs for young children 
and pregnant and breastfeeding mothers.
Extension staff should collaborate with colleagues working on human nutrition 
within the ministries of health and education to raise the awareness of families 
about good eating practices and the contribution that chickens and eggs can 
make to good health.
6.7.1 Nutritional value of chicken meat
Meat from village chickens contains highly valuable proteins, vitamins and 
minerals, and relatively little fat. As a result of genotype and the scavenging 
Chapter 6  Flock management
76 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
diet, the fat consists of over 60% unsaturated fatty acids and a relatively high 
proportion of omega-3 fatty acids, which are very beneficial in membrane 
formation in developing babies and children. 
why do we need proteins?
The human body constantly needs proteins. Each adult needs to 
consume 45–55 g of proteins daily. While absolute amounts depend 
on age and body weight, growing children and nursing mothers 
need a higher proportion of proteins in their diets.
Every cell of the body contains proteins. An adult’s body contains 
about 12 kg of proteins. Furthermore, hormones and enzymes, 
which are necessary for all essential functions of our body, cannot 
exist and work without proteins.
This means NO life without proteins!
6.7.2 Selection of chickens for consumption or sale
When selecting chickens for consumption, sale, barter or other purposes, 
both optimal use of the available feed resources and breeding factors should 
be considered: chickens that perform well should remain in the flock for 
further production and breeding while unproductive birds should be 
culled from the flock (Figure 18). In this way, a farmer will not waste valuable 
feed resources on unproductive birds while at the same time the quality of the 
flock will gradually be improved.
The large, fast-growing chicks are usually the male birds. These are called 
cockerels and they are best eaten when they are young as only a few mature 
male birds are required for breeding.
When culling chickens from the flock, the following points should be 
considered:
•	 Cull cockerels for consumption or sale at about 4–5 months of age. Keep 
only the best cockerels for breeding.
•	 Sell or eat the hens that are not laying well.
•	 Sell or eat hens that are older than 2 years, as egg production and meat 
quality rapidly fall after this age.
•	 Keep female birds that lay and mother well for further production.
•	 Select the best-performing birds for breeding (see Section 6.6).
77
Figure 18.  The selection process required for improving a chicken flock
6.7.3 Marketing surplus chickens
For many farmers, village chickens are a living bank account. The sale of 
chickens or eggs can resolve many of the money problems that rural families 
face, such as the payment of school fees, purchase of clothes or medicines 
or essential food items like oil or salt. The sale (or barter) of chickens can also 
enable farmers to acquire other domestic animals such as pigs, sheep, goats 
and cattle.
Economic studies have shown that although an increased supply of village 
chickens may slightly lower the price of those chickens, farmers will be able 
to sell more birds and their total income will be higher. Urban consumers 
in many regions have a preference for village chickens over intensively 
produced broilers and it is estimated that a very large increase in village 
chicken production would be needed before consumers in urban areas 
became oversupplied with chickens. Prices of village chickens (per bird and, 
even more markedly, per kg) are generally higher than intensively produced 
chickens and, if prices were to fall along with a more plentiful supply, it would 
be expected that urban consumers in most societies and cultures would eat 
more village chickens and fewer intensively produced broilers.
Sell and consume eggs
Sell and consume growers,   
surplus cockerels etc.
Sell and eat old and poor  
performing hens and roosters
Eggs
Young chickens
Laying hens; roosters
Best hens and roosters for breeding
Chapter 6  Flock management
78 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Questions concerning an increased off-take (in terms of sale 
and/or barter):
•	 Where can the eggs and birds be sold at a good price?
•	 When are the best times to sell chickens or eggs?
•	 Is it better to sell chickens or eggs?
Instead of selling chickens only when money is needed, birds or eggs  
should also be sold or consumed to maintain an optimal flock size throughout 
the year (see Section 6.2). Furthermore, farmers can plan ahead to produce 
and sell more birds before public holidays when people like to prepare  
feasts with meat.
If feed is scarce, it is best to sell eggs instead of taking the risk of raising 
chicks. On the other hand, chickens should be raised for sale when  
feed for scavenging is available in abundance, to make use of this  
cost-free resource.
tips for extension staff to help with marketing surplus  
chickens and eggs:
•	 Inform chicken traders in central markets of areas where farmers 
are vaccinating against ND. Tell them that they will usually find 
chickens to buy if they make the effort to visit these areas. 
Newcastle disease also causes problems for chicken traders, 
because it can be difficult for them to buy birds at a reasonable 
price after an outbreak. Traders can also lose money if birds 
purchased from many different houses and areas become infected 
with ND and die before reaching the market.
•	 Encourage local communities to select their own chicken traders. 
Just as the community can choose community vaccinators, they 
can also choose people to take their surplus birds and eggs to 
central markets for sale. In this way, the farmers are more likely to 
get a fair price for their birds, and the profits involved in chicken 
trading will stay within the community. Training may be required 
to ensure that sales are fairly distributed and that trips to central 
markets are made when buyers are more likely to have money  
(e.g. the first week after government salaries are paid) and  
when major festivals are about to take place (e.g. religious or  
other holidays).
•	 Organise local market days, maybe monthly, and invite chicken 
traders, restaurant owners etc. to attend.
79
6.7.4 Food safety
Sick, dying or dead birds should NOT be consumed. They should be  
buried in a deep pit away from water sources and beyond the reach of 
predators. Consume only healthy birds from healthy flocks.
As apparently healthy birds might also be incubating a disease, and  
to improve food safety in general, the following precautions should  
also be taken.
keep clean:
•	 wash your hands with soap before handling food and again (frequently) 
during food preparation
•	 wash your hands with soap thoroughly after handling poultry meat
•	 wash and sanitise all work surfaces and instruments used to prepare  
meat for cooking
•	 protect kitchen areas and food from insects, pests and other animals.
Separate raw and cooked food:
•	 separate raw meat, poultry and seafood from other foods
•	 use separate equipment and utensils, such as knives and cutting boards, 
for handling raw foods
•	 store food in containers to avoid contact between raw and  
prepared foods.
Cook food thoroughly:
•	 cook poultry meat, eggs and blood thoroughly
•	 foods such as soups and stews should reach boiling point. For  
meat and poultry, make sure that juices run clear, not pink. 
Safe slaughtering practices
If an apparently healthy bird selected for slaughter is incubating 
a zoonotic disease such as HPAI, the most dangerous period 
to the handler is during the slaughter and preparation of the 
bird. In addition to the virus inside the bird, there will also be large 
numbers of virus particles on the feathers around the vent and on 
the head. Birds should be placed in scalding water (70 °C; this is 
approximately when steam comes off hot water but before it boils) 
for a minute before having their feathers plucked or their feathers 
burnt off in a fire. Scalding will also make it easier to remove (i.e. 
pluck) the feathers. 
Chapter 6  Flock management
80 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
6.8 Egg production (sale and consumption)
Eggs can be used to produce more chicks, but once ND is under  
control and chick husbandry is improved, not all of the eggs are necessary  
to produce offspring. Many of the eggs laid can be collected and either  
sold or eaten by the farmer and their family. The eggs are therefore a useful 
source of extra income and a very good source of nutrition for all members  
of the family.
Families should generally be encouraged to eat more eggs when  
they own a productive chicken flock. In some regions, it is traditional to 
prohibit the consumption of eggs by women and children. Overcoming  
these traditions and gaining recognition for eggs as a valuable source  
of nutrients will help to improve nutrition in these regions. In areas where 
ND control and improved husbandry have been successfully introduced, 
consumption of eggs has increased. It is likely that most traditions  
prohibiting consumption of eggs developed because of the need to ensure 
that most eggs laid could hatch to produce replacement stock in the face  
of high mortality. 
the development of an egg
All of the eggs that she will ever produce are already present in  
a young hen in the form of ova, which can be found in the ovary 
as tiny, whitish, bubble-like structures (Figure 19). When the hen  
is in lay, the ova grow one at a time to form yellowish egg yolks. 
Each ovum takes about 2–3 weeks to mature to a yolk. During  
the laying period, one egg yolk or follicle is released from the 
ovary every day and falls into the infundibulum, a funnel-like 
structure at the top of the oviduct. In the oviduct, albumen is 
deposited around the yolk and then, further along, in the isthmus, 
two shell membranes are formed to surround the albumen. After  
the egg is ‘plumped’ with water, the membranous egg moves into  
the uterus or ‘shell gland’ where the shell is deposited. The time 
taken from release of the follicle from the ovary until lay is usually  
a little over 24 hours.
81
Figure 19.  Diagram of the female reproductive tract of a chicken
6.8.1 Nutritional value of eggs
Eggs provide a range of essential nutrients and can make a substantial 
contribution to a healthy diet, especially for growing children, pregnant and 
nursing women, and HIV-positive individuals.
Each 100 g of eggs (a weight less than that of two eggs) contains about  
13 g of proteins, 11 g of fats (in the egg yolk), 1 g of carbohydrates and  
74 g of water (mainly in the albumen). The proteins contained in an egg are 
easily absorbed in the intestine and are therefore of high value for humans—
even higher than the proteins contained in milk. In addition, a variety of 
minerals and vitamins (except vitamin C) are concentrated in eggs (Table 7). 
Research has also revealed that eggs contain several specific nutrients that 
have health-promoting properties, such as folic acid and iodine. 
Oviduct
Infundibulum
Ovary containing ova
Follicle
Uterus
Isthmus
Cloaca
Chapter 6  Flock management
82 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Table 7.  Nutrient contents of 100 g of eggs
Main nutrients (g)  vitamins (mg) Minerals (mg)
Proteins  13  
Fats 11
Carbohydrates 1
Water 74
E 2.02
A 0.27
K 0.05
B2 0.31
B1 0.10
B6 0.08
Folic acid 0.07
Phosphorus 216
Potassium 147
Sodium 144
Calcium  56
Magnesium 12
Iron 2.1
Fluorine 0.1
Iodine  0.01
Extension workers should collaborate with colleagues working on human 
nutrition within the ministries of health and education to raise the awareness 
of families about good eating practices and the contribution that chickens and 
eggs can make to good health.
6.8.2 When to take eggs for sale or consumption
Eggs can be taken from every clutch before the hen has started to brood.  
Once the hen is brooding, the development of the embryo commences in  
fertile eggs (i.e. when a hen has mated with a rooster before starting to lay 
eggs; see Figure 13). It is recommended that these eggs be left with the hen. 
However, when a hen has not mated with a rooster before laying eggs, these 
eggs will be infertile and no chick will develop inside. Infertile eggs can be 
eaten even if the hen has sat on them for a few days. They can be identified  
by candling (see Section 6.4.3). These brooded eggs should be hard boiled  
(at least 10 minutes) or fried before consumption, to destroy any germs that 
might have penetrated through the eggshell.
It is advisable to consume or sell eggs instead of breeding chicks in times  
when the chance of survival for the chicks is low, such as when
•	 there is not enough feed for the chicks to survive (because of the season  
of the year or because too many animals are competing for the SFRB)
•	 the flock is already large and a further increase in stocking density is likely 
to cause problems
•	 chicks would be likely to suffer due to heavy rainfall or other seasonal and 
climatic influences.
6.8.3 Egg storage and conservation
How should eggs be stored?
With fertile eggs (when the hen has mated with a rooster) the embryo will start  
to grow even at ambient temperature (above 20 °C). Eggs should therefore be 
kept in a cool, shady place. A basket or box containing sawdust or bran placed 
in a hole in the floor in the coolest part of the dwelling makes a good store. For 
short-term storage, the way in which the egg is positioned is not important but, for 
long-term storage, there is some merit in storing the eggs with their pointed ends 
uppermost. Eggs for incubation should not be stored for longer than 2 weeks.
83
Do not store eggs kept for consumption beside items with a strong smell, 
as the eggs easily absorb the smell through the shell and the whole meal 
prepared with one of these eggs might be spoiled.
How long can eggs be stored before consumption?
If kept in a cool, shady place, a fertile egg will be suitable for home 
consumption for about 2 weeks, but it is desirable to use them before this if 
possible. In eggs that are not fertile, no embryo will start to develop but—as 
with fertile eggs—germs might enter through the shell and multiply inside the 
egg if it is stored for a long time at temperatures above 20 °C. Infertile eggs 
should therefore also be used within about 5–7 days if possible.
Eggs with a broken shell should be used immediately and consumed only 
after they have been cooked for some time (hard boiled, fried or well cooked 
with a meal).
How can fresh eggs be distinguished from old, bad eggs?
Place eggs in a container of water. Old eggs, which may be bad and which 
should not be eaten, will float in the water because a bubble-like chamber of 
air (the air cell) inside the egg gets bigger with the age of the egg (see Figure 
20). This air chamber is smaller in fresh eggs, which will therefore stay at the 
bottom of the container filled with water. 
 
 
Figure 20. The freshness of whole eggs can be determined by floating them in 
water. Fresh eggs with a small air cell will sink lower (perhaps completely)  
in the water (eggs to the left) than will older eggs, in which the air cell  
has increased in size. The older egg is therefore lighter and so sits higher  
in the water (eggs to the right).
Fresh eggs can also be distinguished from old ones by the height of the 
albumen (the white or clear part of the egg) once an unboiled egg is opened 
and put on a dish (see Figure 21). The albumen of fresh eggs is quite high 
(maybe half as high as the egg yolk). In older eggs the albumen becomes 
watery and lies flat on the plate; the egg yolk is also flatter.
Chapter 6  Flock management
84 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
Figure 21.  The freshness of an open egg can be estimated by breaking the egg onto 
a flat surface. The yolk will sit higher than the white in a fresh egg (top).  
As an egg ages, it will lose all structure, becoming completely flat (bottom).
How can eggs be preserved?
The quality of albumen declines very rapidly when eggs are stored at room 
temperature, especially in hot climates. Refrigeration is effective in maintaining 
quality for several months (Table 8). Oiling eggs on the day of lay will preserve 
their quality for several weeks. Wipe the egg with a little cooking oil after 
cleaning the shell. This will close the small pores in the eggshell and prevent 
moisture and carbon dioxide from escaping from the egg. The oil film also 
prevents germs from entering, provided the shell is clean.
Hard-boiled eggs can be stored for several weeks. These eggs might also be 
oiled to preserve their quality for even longer periods. Another possibility is 
to store raw eggs in water glass (sodium silicate) solution. Eggs will keep for 
several months in water glass if covered and stored in a cool place. The water 
glass solution is made by mixing one part of water glass (sodium silicate) to 
five parts of previously boiled but cooled water.
85
Table 8. Approximate safe storage times for eggs
type of storage Approximate length of storage
Eggs with a broken shell Use immediately and do not store
Fresh eggs (fertile and infertile) stored in warm 
conditions (above 20 °C)
1–2 days. If unsure of the age of the eggs, 
test to see if they are spoilt, and hard boil or 
cook them well before consumption.
Fresh eggs (fertile and infertile) stored in a cool, 
shady place
5–7 days
Oiling egg on the day of lay and kept in cool, 
shady conditions (use cooking or vegetable oil)
2 weeks
Hard boiling eggs on the day of lay 3 weeks
Hard boiling and oiling fresh eggs 4–5 weeks
Stored in water glass (1 part sodium silicate  
to 5 parts of boiled and cooled water)
Several months
Refrigeration (where the temperature is 
constantly maintained around 4 °C)
4 weeks
6.8.4 Egg quality
The quality of an egg depends on:
•	 whether it is clean or dirty
•	 how long it has been stored
•	 the health status of the hen that laid it
•	 whether or not it is fertile.
Can dirty eggs be consumed?
Eggs should be cleaned before they are sold or consumed, as the dirt on the 
eggshell is likely to contain germs and may cause people to get sick. Wipe 
eggs with a dry cloth soon after collecting them. Do not wash eggs with water 
because that will destroy a very thin protective covering on the eggshell which 
protects the egg from germs.
Can eggs that have been taken from a brooding hen be consumed?
Once the hen is brooding, the development of the embryo will start in 
fertile eggs (if the hen mated with a rooster before starting to lay eggs). It is 
recommended that fertile eggs be left with the hen. Infertile eggs (which do 
not contain a developing embryo) might be taken from a brooding hen for 
consumption. The latter can be identified by candling the eggs at day 5–7  
of brooding (see Section 6.4.3).
Can eggs cause disease in humans?
Some eggs might be contaminated with germs such as salmonella that can 
cause diarrhoea, especially in young children and sick and older people. Most 
of these germs are destroyed by heat, so, to avoid diarrhoea, eggs (at least 
Chapter 6  Flock management
86 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
those of unknown origin) should be eaten only after being thoroughly  
cooked (e.g. hard boiled or well fried). It is always best to consume eggs  
that are as fresh as possible to avoid germs that may multiply inside  
the egg.
does the colour of the egg yolk indicate its quality?
The colour of the egg yolk may vary from light yellow to orange,  
depending on the feed the chicken has eaten. The colour may reflect the 
vitamin content of eggs produced by scavenging or ‘free-range’ chickens  
that do not have access to commercial diets.  Changes of the egg  
yolk to a greenish or brownish colour may be caused by drugs or  
toxins (Table 9).
do stains or small spots in the albumen influence the egg quality?
Small stains or ‘meat’ spots in the eggwhite (albumen) are often caused  
by small amounts of coagulated blood that accompany the yolk at the  
time of its release from the ovary. They have no effect on the nutritive value  
or safety of eggs.
why do some eggs smell like fish?
While eggs might smell like fish if the chicken’s feed contained too much 
fish, some hens produce eggs smelling or even tasting like fish even if they 
are not fed fishy feed. The smell might then be caused by a substance called 
trimethylamine which can be produced after hens are fed rapeseed (also 
known as canola). The production of trimethylamine in a hen is an inherited 
characteristic and, if only certain hens are producing strongly smelling  
eggs, these birds should be slaughtered or, alternatively, not fed rapeseed. 
These hens can also be identified by opening their beaks and smelling their 
breath to see if it has the same strong smell.
Eggs may also have a fishy smell if the hen is suffering from salpingitis,  
an infection of the reproductive system.
6.8.5  Diseases and disorders affecting egg quality
Diseases in hens, as well as poor husbandry or nutrition, might affect egg 
production. A hen in bad condition will produce fewer or even no eggs.  
The quality of eggs may also be affected by several diseases and disorders. 
Table 9 summarises the types of changes in egg quality that can occur,  
and possible reasons for these changes.
87
Table 9.  Reasons for reduced egg quality
Sign Cause or contributing factor
Non-infectious Infectious
Shape of the egg:
Small size of eggs Low body weight
Imbalanced ration (lack of 
protein)
Lack of water
High ambient temperature
Toxins
Infectious bronchitis
Newcastle disease
Diseases affecting the liver
Changes in the  
egg shape
Toxins Infection with adenoviruses
Infection with mycoplasmas
Newcastle disease
Egg shell:
Dirty shell Diarrhoea in the hen
Dirty nest
Spirochaete infection
Thin, perhaps  
cracked, shell 
Lack of calcium, phosphorus 
and vitamin D3
Newcastle disease
Infectious bronchitis
Egg drop syndrome (EDS; 
adenovirus infection)
Lack of hard shell – EDS
Avian influenza
Pale shell – Infection with pneumovirus
Infectious bronchitis
EDS
Rough shell – Infectious bronchitis
Albumen (eggwhite):
Watery albumen Old egg
Toxins
Infectious bronchitis
Diseases affecting the liver
Slightly pink albumen Feeding cottonseed
a –
Egg yolk:
Greenish colour Feeding cottonseeda –
Brownish colour Using piperazine for 
deworming
–
Watery egg yolk Old egg Infectious bronchitis
Stained, spotted  
egg yolk
(Depending on the pigments 
contained in the ration)
Coccidiosis
Worms
a  Cotton plants contain gossypol, a natural toxin causing the change in colour.
Chapter 6  Flock management
88 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management
6.9 Record keeping
A more active and interested farmer will spend some time each day observing 
their chickens. 
The keeping of records is a very useful management tool. Where someone in 
a family can read and write, simple records will help the individual farmer as 
well as extension workers and other technical people to identify problems and 
optimise production. 
Some of the production parameters that would be useful to record include (for 
each hen and her progeny):
•	 mortality (clinical signs and/or suggested cause)—flock statistics
•	 general laying ability (number of eggs per clutch)
•	 number of clutches per year
•	 number of chicks hatched
•	 number of chicks reared (to, say, 8 weeks of age)
•	 number of chickens and eggs sold
•	 number of chickens and eggs eaten
•	 vaccination and other treatments applied (when and with what). 
89
7 Disorders related to poor husbandry  
 or nutrition
Poor husbandry and nutrition will result in low productivity and may lead to 
disease or even death of the chickens. Disorders caused by poor husbandry 
or nutrition cannot spread from one bird to another (they are not infectious) 
but often the whole flock or age group is affected because all of the birds are 
living under similar conditions. Tables 10 and 11 give an overview of possible 
consequences of poor husbandry and nutrition.
Table 10.  Chicken disorders caused by poor husbandry (other than nutrition)
Sign Cause or contributing factor
Drop in productivity High temperature, lack of water, overcrowding
Respiratory distress High temperature, lack of water, overcrowding
Respiratory signs Poor-quality air in the chicken house (due to high amount of wet 
faeces), overcrowding
Chicken house does not protect the birds from rain or wind 
(leaking roof, wall with holes, poor location)
Diarrhoea Moist chicken house, moist areas around the troughs leads to 
infectious diseases; dietary problem
Feather pecking  
Cannibalism
Crowded chicken house and other stresses
Lesions on the feet Rough and/or dirty floor in the chicken house
Table 11.  Chicken disorders caused by poor nutrition
Sign Cause or contributing factor
Low productivity Insufficient or poor-quality feed
Low hatching rate Lack of vitamins
High chick mortality Lack of vitamins or trace minerals, lack of feed or poor-quality feed
High susceptibility to any disease Lack of vitamins, trace minerals or proteins
Retarded growth of body and 
feathers
Lack of vitamins or trace minerals
Soft legs that can bend in chicks Lack of minerals (calcium, phosphorus) and vitamins (vitamin D)
Fractured legs and wings in 
laying hens
Lack of minerals (calcium, phosphorus) and vitamins (vitamin D)
Curled toes, deformed legs Lack of vitamins (B vitamins)
Thin eggshells, eggs without shell Lack of minerals (calcium, phosphorus) and vitamins (vitamin D)
Diarrhoea Bad-quality feed (contaminated with infectious agents)  
Carbohydrate fractions in certain grains and grain legumes  
High salt levels
Blue comb Lack of water
Central nervous signs Lack of vitamins (B vitamins)
Sugar-like layer on inner organs 
(gout)
Lack of water, surplus of minerals, lack of vitamin A
Enlarged yellow liver Lack of dietary proteins, surplus of carbohydrates or fats in the 
ration
Swollen kidneys Lack of water, too much salt in diet
90 Part 2  Housing, nutrition and management

91
PART 3
Diseases and their control
This section provides a guide to diseases; their identification, prevention  
and control.
Reference is made to use of antibiotics and insecticides for the control of 
some diseases and infestations. In most cases, their use is of questionable 
value in village flocks. Unless general husbandry is improved, the single use  
of an antibiotic or insecticide is highly unlikely to significantly increase 
production in the medium to long term.
The misuse of antibiotics and insecticides can promote increased resistance 
to these products and reduce their efficacy in the long term. Therefore, if  
a decision is made to use them, care should be taken to ensure that:
1. the most appropriate medicinal substance or insecticide has been selected
2. its expiry date has not been passed
3. it has been properly stored
4. the instructions for its use are followed closely.
Remember that preventing a disease is better and generally cheaper than 
treating it. Preventing disease in village chickens by the strategic use of 
vaccination and improved husbandry is usually the most cost-effective 
approach.
92 Part 3  diseases and their control
8 Disease in village chickens
8.1 Introduction
Disease in village chickens can be defined as any change or impairment 
of normal body function that affects the birds’ ability to survive, grow or 
reproduce. Societies have developed many theories about what causes 
disease in people and animals. Some theories suggest that disease is caused 
by evil spirits or by witchcraft. In parts of West Africa, for example, some 
people believe that their chickens die in large numbers just before Christmas 
because God needs them at this time. Advances in science and medicine 
have given us a much better understanding of the causes of diseases, which 
are discussed in Section 8.2.
Respect local ideas and beliefs that explain the occurrence of 
diseases while also helping farmers to understand how a disease 
can affect chickens and, in the case of an infectious disease, how it 
is transmitted.
An understanding of the cause of a disease and its method of spread 
(transmission) will assist in controlling it. Knowledge of the clinical signs of a 
disease and the characteristics of lesions found post-mortem will assist in its 
diagnosis. 
8.2 Causes of disease
Many diseases—called infectious diseases—are caused by organisms that 
can be transmitted from one bird to another. Some of these organisms are too 
small to be seen without the assistance of special equipment. Such organisms 
include viruses (ND virus, for example), bacteria (salmonella, for example), 
mycoplasmas, fungi and small parasites called protozoans (coccidia, for 
example). Other infectious organisms such as external (lice, fleas and ticks) or 
internal (roundworms, tapeworms, flukes) parasites are easier to see.
Other diseases can be caused by poor nutrition or husbandry (see Chapter 7), 
or are inherited. These diseases do not spread from one bird to another and 
affect only single birds or flocks.
In many cases, disease results from a combination of factors (Figure 22). 
Husbandry, nutrition, environmental factors and flock management all have 
a direct and important influence on the health and productivity of chickens. 
A well-nourished chicken kept under good husbandry conditions can fight 
diseases better and is less likely to suffer from many infectious diseases.
93Chapter 8  disease in village chickens
Figure 22. Factors influencing the health status of chickens (adapted from 
Woernle and Jodas 2001)
8.3 Transmission of infectious diseases
Diseases that are caused by viruses, bacteria, mycoplasmas, fungi or 
parasites (infectious diseases) can spread from one bird to another. The ways 
and mechanisms of this process, called ‘transmission’, must be understood if 
the correct measures are to be taken to prevent the spread of such diseases.
Most infectious agents enter via the beak while the chicken is eating, drinking 
or cleaning its feathers, or during breathing. Other infectious agents can infect 
a bird through a wound. The agent then multiplies within the chicken and 
may spread, causing damage (lesions) in certain organs and, consequently, 
clinical signs. After multiplication, some of the infectious agents leave the bird 
in its droppings, in discharges from lesions, in its breath, or even on dropped 
feathers. If other birds come in contact with these contaminated items, then 
they too may get sick.
Infectious agents can survive outside the bird for variable periods. Worm eggs 
and coccidia, for example, can survive for several months in the environment 
Viruses
Bacteria
Mycoplasmas
Fungi
Parasites
EnvironmentChicken
Infectious 
agents
General condition
Age
Stress
Inherited characteristics
Susceptibility to diseases
Climate (temperature, rain, wind)
Housing conditions
Availability of water
Availability of feed
Feed quality
Air quality
94 Part 3  diseases and their control
while some other infectious agents are quickly destroyed by sunlight or heat. 
For spread of diseases caused by agents that are readily destroyed, direct 
contact between the birds is necessary. On the other hand, infectious agents 
that can survive for a certain time in the environment can also be spread via 
any person, animal or material that might carry the agent. The infectious agent 
might be carried with small traces of droppings on shoes, for example, or in 
the dust or small feathers attached to any rough surface, on the eggshell or 
with any part of a dead chicken.
When an infectious agent enters a bird, the bird does not get sick immediately. 
It usually takes some days for the bird to show signs of illness. This period is 
called the ‘incubation period’. During the incubation period the bird does not 
look sick but the number of infectious organisms inside it increases rapidly 
and some organisms may leave the bird when it breathes or drinks or passes 
droppings (Figure 23). This means that the agents causing an infectious 
disease can be spreading even before clinical signs of the disease can  
be seen.
Some infectious diseases can also be spread vertically, i.e. from the hen to 
its offspring, by transmission through eggs. To date, vertically transmitted 
diseases appear to have been more of a problem in commercial poultry 
enterprises.
8.4 Notifiable diseases
Some infectious poultry diseases (particularly ND and HPAI) cannot be 
controlled by good husbandry and flock management alone. These diseases 
are caused by very strong and contagious viruses and can lead to very high 
losses in chickens or other poultry species. Because of the huge impact 
these diseases may have on poultry production and trade, they are notifiable 
all over the world, i.e. they are World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) 
‘transboundary animal diseases’. Outbreaks must be reported to, and control 
measures coordinated by, the veterinary authorities.
8.5 Diagnosis of poultry disease
Since several factors may cause a disease or contribute to it, it is important 
to conduct a thorough investigation. This will assist you to make an accurate 
diagnosis, to understand why the birds got sick and to take appropriate 
control measures.
Examination of the sick chicken, the case history and an examination of the 
whole flock and its environment are important parts of the investigation. These 
provide the information needed to understand the course of any disease. Each 
of these is discussed in this chapter.
95
Figure 23.  It takes 2–15 days from the time they come into contact with the Newcastle 
disease (ND) virus for birds to show signs of illness. 
2–15 DAYS
ND 
Particle
Chapter 8  disease in village chickens
96 Part 3  diseases and their control
8.5.1 Case history
The case history will give information about the course of the  
disease (the number of birds affected, and the severity and duration  
of the disease), the means of introduction into the flock and whether  
or not the disease is infectious.
The person looking after the chickens should be asked the  
following questions since they generally have a better understanding  
of what is going on in the flock than the head of the household.
the farmer’s observations of their chickens:
•	 Why do you think the chickens are sick? Describe the  
signs observed.
•	 What age groups are affected by the disease (chicks,  
growers, adults)?
•	 When did your chickens become sick?
the severity and nature of the disease:
•	 How many chickens do you have? How many of them are sick?
•	 Did any of your chickens die? OR Have any chickens been  
slaughtered recently because they were sick? If yes: how many?
•	 Do you have other birds besides chickens? Are they sick too?
Husbandry factors:
•	 Do you provide feed and water for your chickens?
•	 If yes: how often do you provide them with fresh feed and water?  
What do you feed your chickens with and how much do you  
give them?
•	 Where do you keep the chickens at night?
•	 If you provide housing for your chickens, how often do you clean  
the shelter?
•	 Did you use any traditional remedies or drugs in your chickens?
•	 Have the birds been vaccinated? When? What vaccine  
was used?
How the disease might have entered the flock:
•	 Do birds in neighbouring flocks show the same signs? If yes,  
how many flocks are affected?
•	 Did you bring new birds to your household recently?
•	 Did you recently visit someone whose chickens were sick?  
OR Has someone whose chickens are sick recently visited  
your homestead?
97
8.5.2 Clinical examination of the whole flock and its environment
This examination will provide information on the health status of the  
flock and confirm the information provided by the person looking after  
the chickens. Since chickens in poor condition are more likely to get  
sick from any infectious agent, an assessment of housing and nutrition  
is also important.
Examination of the whole flock:
•	 Are the chickens active?
•	 Do they scavenge for their feed? 
•	 Is feed and water provided?  If so, is the feed fresh or old  
and/or mouldy?
•	 How many of the chickens are sick?
•	 Which age groups are affected by the disease?
•	 What does the plumage (feathers) look like?
•	 What do the droppings look like? 
•	 Are the hens laying eggs as normal?
•	 What do the eggs look like?
Examination of the environment:
•	 If the farmer provides housing:
 –  Where and how are the chickens kept at night?
 –  Is the shelter clean?
 –  Is the shelter crowded at night?
•	 If the farmer provides feed/water: 
 – What is the quality of the feed or water provided?
 –  Is the drinker or feed trough clean?
•	 Do the chickens find feed and water in the surroundings of  
the homestead?
•	 Are there many droppings close to the chicken house, waterer  
or feed trough?
8.5.3 Clinical examination of sick birds
To examine a sick chicken you will have to catch and hold it in your hands 
(Figure 24). If there is a possibility that the chicken is infected with HPAI or any 
other disease that can also infect humans, then appropriate safety measures 
should be used (see Section 11.2). A hook made of wire might help you 
to catch chickens (Figure 25). The design of the hook is important and will 
depend on the age and size of the birds. It is important that the hook is used  
in a way that does not injure the bird (Figure 26).
Chapter 8  disease in village chickens
98 Part 3  diseases and their control
 
 
Figure 24.  Birds should be handled correctly to minimise stress. Do not hold birds by 
their legs only (a). Rather, use two hands to hold both the legs and support 
the bird’s neck (b).
 
 
Figure 25. Design of a wire hook for catching chickens
 
 
Figure 26. Correct use of a wire hook to catch a chicken
(a) (b)
99
Examine the bird thoroughly for the following signs:
General signs
•	 Is the bird active or sleepy?
•	 Are the feathers smooth, clean and free of external parasites?
•	 Is the bird well nourished? (Feel the breast muscle of the bird:  
birds that have been sick for a long time lose body weight and  
have a thin breast muscle. Feel the muscle of other birds for  
comparison.)
•	 Has the bird eaten within the last few hours? Feel the crop  
to confirm.
Respiratory signs
•	 Is the bird breathing through an open beak?
•	 Is the breathing noisy?
•	 Is the bird coughing or sneezing? 
•	 Are there swellings around the eyes and discharge from the eyes,  
nose or beak? If present, nasal discharge can be squeezed out by 
pressing gently above the nostrils.
diarrhoea
•	 Are the feathers around the vent dirty? The feathers will be dirty when  
the bird has diarrhoea.
Nervous signs
•	 Does the bird show any nervous signs (e.g. twisted neck, trembling)?
Movement
•	 Is the bird lame?
•	 Are the joints swollen?
•	 Are the legs and wings in a normal position?
Skin and feathers
•	 Are there external parasites on the feathers and on body regions  
with few feathers (head, under the wings, above the vent)?
•	 Are there injuries or lesions on the bird’s skin, especially on the head, 
comb and wattles?
•	 Are the feathers damaged?
•	 Are there changes in colour (pale, dark, bluish) or size of the comb  
or wattles?
Chapter 8  disease in village chickens
100 Part 3  diseases and their control
Table 12 (see also Table 15 in Chapter 10) indicates that several diseases 
of village chickens may cause similar clinical signs. In most cases, clinical 
examination and the case history provide information that allows a clinical 
diagnosis to be made, but do not reveal the definitive cause of the disease.  
A particular cause (e.g. coccidiosis if bloody diarrhoea in younger chicks 
has been observed) may be suspected but a proper clinical diagnosis has to 
concentrate on actual facts (e.g. ‘bloody diarrhoea, suspected coccidiosis’).
This manual therefore concentrates on the identification of clinical signs and 
describes how a clinical diagnosis may be reached. Chapter 9 provides general 
information on prevention and control of infectious diseases. A detailed description 
of individual diseases is then given in Chapters 10 and 11. The diseases in Chapter 
11 are listed in alphabetical order to make it easier to locate them.
Appendixes 3–5 provide information on post-mortems, sample collection and 
serology for those who have the equipment to perform these procedures.
Table 12.  Clinical signs that may be present in sick chickens and possible 
reasons for their occurrence
Clinical signs Possible reasons
General Depression, listlessness,
inappetence, drooping wings, 
low productivity
Wide range of causes
Emaciation Chronic, long-lasting disease
Respiratory  
system—breathing
With open beak Newcastle disease (ND), infectious 
laryngotracheitis
Other severe respiratory disease
Very hot weather
Distressed, noisy, rattling ND, highly pathogenic avian 
influenza (HPAI), severe 
respiratory disease
Coughing, sneezing, wheezing, 
gurgling
Infectious coryza, infectious 
bronchitis (IB), chronic respiratory 
disease (CRD), other respiratory 
disease
Fowl cholera
Respiratory  
system—nostrils
Wet or crusted because of 
nasal discharge
Infectious coryza, CRD, other 
respiratory disease
Eyes Swelling around the eyes Infectious coryza, CRD, other 
respiratory disease
ND, fowl cholera
Discharge Infectious coryza, CRD, other 
respiratory disease
Fowl cholera
Cloudy pupils Various reasons
Alimentary system Dirty vent Coccidia, worms, spirochaete 
infection
ND, infectious bursal disease  
IBD/Gumboro disease 
Fowl typhoid, pullorum disease, 
fowl cholera, colisepticaemia or 
other infectious disease
101
Clinical signs Possible reasons
Nervous system Twisted neck (torticollis) ND, HPAI or any other disease 
affecting the nervous system
Lameness (paralysis) ND or any other disease affecting 
the nervous system
Trembling, shaking ND or any other disease affecting 
the nervous system
Musculoskeletal system Lameness Crusted legs due to scaly leg 
mites
Marek’s disease
Other reasons
Swollen joints Fowl cholera
Various other reasons
Abnormal position of legs Marek’s disease
Nutritional deficiencies
Any accident
Various other diseases
Swellings under the feet Infected injuries
Feathers Small spots, maybe moving External parasites—lice or mites
Moulting Usual moulting process (once  
a year)
Under stress
Ruffled General sign indicating that  
a chicken is sick
Lesions, damage Lice
Feather pecking or cannibalism
Skin Pale skin IBD/Gumboro
Severe infestation with external 
parasites, especially the red fowl 
mite
Dark, bluish (bruising) HPAI, ND, aspergillosis, IBD/
Gumboro
Skin—comb Yellowish to dark-brown  
crusty spots
Fowl pox
Pale Chronic diseases
Severe infestation with parasites
Dark, bluish Acute feverish diseases affecting 
the circulatory system (e.g. fowl 
cholera, HPAI, ND)
Skin—wattle Yellowish to dark-brown lesions Fowl pox
Dark, bluish Acute febrile diseases affecting 
the circulatory system (e.g. fowl 
cholera, HPAI)
Swollen Fowl cholera, HPAI, ND
Inside the beak Yellow–white cheesy-looking 
lesions
Fowl pox
Table 12.  (continued)
Chapter 8  disease in village chickens
102 Part 3  diseases and their control
9 Disease control
9.1 Introduction
To keep chickens in good health and support high productivity it is  
necessary to control the diseases affecting the birds. Effective disease  
control includes measures taken to cure or eradicate a disease as well  
as measures designed to prevent it.
what should be the aim: eradication or control?
It is not always possible to eradicate the cause of an infectious disease, 
especially if wild birds also carry the infectious agent or if the infectious  
agent is very widespread (endemic). However, it is possible and desirable  
to control the clinical diseases caused by many infectious agents. For 
example, ND virus is endemic in many regions and is therefore almost 
impossible to eradicate. Nevertheless, the clinical signs of ND can be  
avoided by regular vaccination and good biosecurity.
9.2 Tools used to control diseases in  
 village chickens
The following are among the measures required to ensure comprehensive 
disease control.
9.2.1 General measures
Husbandry, nutrition, flock management and environmental factors  
have a direct and important influence on flock health (discussed in  
Chapter 8). Improvements in these areas should generally be part  
of the control of any disease (see Part 2—Housing, nutrition and 
management).
9.2.2 Hygiene (biosecurity)
Procedures described in the sanitary rules (see Section 9.3) will help
 to prevent the entry and spread of infectious diseases and contribute  
to improved flock productivity and production of better-quality eggs  
and meat.
9.2.3 Traditional remedies
In many countries, farmers use traditional remedies to treat diseases  
of village chickens. Some of the remedies may be effective, and others less 
effective or even harmful. This manual does not deal with the large range of 
traditional remedies that are used. However, local extension officers should 
identify and test remedies used in the areas where they work.
103
No known cure for Nd or HPAI
There is no known cure (traditional or otherwise) for diseases such 
as ND and HPAI. The best way to control ND is through prevention, 
the most important aspect of which is vaccination.
9.2.4 Vaccination
Vaccines can protect animals from infectious diseases but they cannot 
treat a disease. Moreover, vaccines are disease-specific and protect animals 
against only a specific disease rather than all diseases. Vaccines work 
best on healthy, well-fed animals that are not suffering from parasites or 
other diseases. do not vaccinate weak or sick birds. If a bird is already 
incubating Nd or another killer disease, the chicken will die and farmers 
may be angry or discouraged, and lose confidence in the vaccine.
Commercial vaccines (produced by large pharmaceutical companies) can 
prevent many diseases in poultry. Nevertheless, their use is often not practical 
under village conditions because many require continuous refrigeration 
(referred to as ‘a constant cool chain’) and are delivered in packages 
containing a large number of doses beyond the needs for small, village  
flocks. In addition, some diseases, such as infectious bursal disease (IBD;  
also known as Gumboro disease), that are of concern for commercial poultry 
units are of little or no economic importance under free-range conditions.
vaccine specificity
Farmers must understand that vaccination with a particular vaccine 
protects their chickens against only a specific disease and that 
their chickens might suffer from other diseases despite successful 
vaccination. An example can be used to explain this: children 
vaccinated against polio or measles might still get malaria.
9.2.5 Commercial medicines and insecticides 
A variety of products (e.g. antibiotics, insecticides and anthelmintics) might be 
available in local supply shops for treatment of poultry diseases. If you intend 
to use them, ensure that the labels on the materials available indicate that they 
are formulated for the treatment of the particular diseases. Always follow the 
instructions on dosage and method of application given  
on the label or information leaflet.
•	 To calculate the correct dose, be aware that sick chickens might feed  
and drink less than normal. Four to five healthy chickens drink 1 litre  
of water per day.
Chapter 9  disease control
104 Part 3  diseases and their control
•	 Drugs that have to be administered via the drinking water might lose  
their potency if added to dirty water. Clean the trough thoroughly and  
use fresh, non-chlorinated water to administer drugs.
•	 The use of most insecticides requires special safety precautions,  
which are given on the instruction leaflet.
REMEMbER: Medicines alone will not eradicate a disease. Clean the 
chicken house and remove infectious material as described in this manual. 
Always make sure that enough fresh water, feed and proper housing are 
available for sick birds to help them recover from a disease.
9.3 How to prevent a disease entering a  
 village chicken flock
Farmers should obey the following sanitary (biosecurity) rules,  
which together are a cheap and a very effective way to prevent  
infectious diseases.
•	 Clean the chicken house, troughs and nests regularly.
•	 Provide separate night housing for the different poultry species.
•	 Encourage separation between animal species and between  
animals and humans; waterfowl should be separated from chickens  
and turkeys.
•	 Regularly clean out and dispose of manure, and preferably compost  
it for at least 3 weeks.
•	 Dispose of sick and dead animals and infected materials correctly, and 
clean and disinfect/decontaminate thoroughly (see below).
•	 Avoid introducing new birds of unknown origin or from a sick flock  
into the ‘home’ flock.
•	 Always scrub cages, egg trays etc. with disinfectant or detergent and  
allow to dry before bringing them onto the farm. Farmers should be 
reminded that manure, dirt, feathers etc. will stop the disinfectant working 
properly. If they do not have any disinfectant, they should put the items 
in a sealed, black plastic bag in direct sunlight for 1 day so that the high 
temperature inside can inactivate disease agents.
•	 Keep new birds separate from the flock for 2 weeks to see if they  
become sick.
•	 Avoid contact of the ‘home’ flock with visitors, cages or animals from  
an area where there is a disease outbreak in poultry.
•	 Wash hands with soap after handling birds from other flocks.
•	 Vaccinate against specific diseases, which is possible but not  
always practical under village conditions (see previous section).  
Regular vaccination against ND is the only effective way to control  
this disease.
105
•	 Well-nourished birds can better fight disease. If possible and where 
necessary, farmers should provide their chickens with supplementary  
feed (Section 5.6) to prevent diseases caused by nutritional deficiencies 
and to promote good health.
•	 Chickens should not be bought from the markets or neighbouring villages 
at times of the year when outbreaks of disease such as ND are more 
common (Figure 27).
•	 Slaughter only healthy birds from healthy flocks for consumption.  
Immerse the bird in boiling water for a minute before plucking the feathers. 
This will make the feathers easier to remove and inactivate any infectious 
agents on the outside of the bird.
•	 In villages where birds are dying of disease, no birds should be 
slaughtered for consumption.
Figure 27.  Do not introduce new birds to flocks during outbreaks of disease.
Chapter 9  disease control
106 Part 3  diseases and their control
9.4 How to control a disease outbreak in a  
 village chicken flock
If they detect illness in one or more of their flock, farmers should take the 
following steps to control the spread of the disease.
•	 They should separate chickens showing signs of illness from healthy birds 
(Figure 28). Sick chickens could be placed in a separate chicken house 
or cage. Always ensure that water and feed are available nearby should 
they wish to drink or eat. Similarly, place new stock into a cage or pen that 
isolates them from the main flock for at least 2 weeks, to ensure that they 
are not carrying any diseases that could be transmitted to the flock.
•	 They should not take sick chickens to another area that is free of the 
disease.
•	 They should slaughter very sick chickens.  This is the best approach to 
take under such circumstances.
•	 They should burn or bury dead chickens or the remains of a slaughtered 
sick bird immediately. If, for any reason, the whole bird cannot be burnt 
or buried, then all parts of the bird (e.g. bones, feathers etc.) that remain 
should be burnt or buried (Figure 29).
•	 If high losses occur in their flock, they should inform their local livestock 
services.
•	 They should clean their chicken house frequently and thoroughly. 
Droppings should be removed as often as possible to avoid further  
spread of the disease. Wood ash or lime should be places on the floor  
and walls.
•	 They should not introduce new birds into the ‘home’ flock if they  
suspect that the chickens in the ‘home’ flock are suffering from an 
infectious disease. Newly introduced birds may also become infected  
with the disease.
•	 If high losses occur in a chicken flock, the farmer’s best approach is to 
slaughter all birds and wait for some time before restocking. For example, 
if birds have died from ND, farmers should wait 30 days after the last bird 
died before introducing new birds. ND virus should be inactivated after 
30 days in most tropical conditions but it can survive for up to 6 months 
in cool, damp locations. The minimum interval before restocking after an 
outbreak of HPAI is 21 days, provided that the poultry premises have been 
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least twice during this period. Under 
most village conditions, however, it is advisable to wait 45–60 days.
•	 If high losses occur in the flock it is best to burn the chicken house and 
build a new one in a different location. Manure from the sick flock should 
also be buried in order to avoid further spread of disease.
107
Figure 29.  Birds killed by disease, or their remains, should be buried (or burned) 
to stop the disease spreading to new areas (a). Burial pits should be at  
least 1 m deep (b) if possible and well away from water sources such as  
wells and rivers. Hands should be washed and clothes washed or boiled 
after dead birds are handled. 
Figure 28.  Sick chickens should be separated from healthy chickens.
(a) (b)
Chapter 9  disease control
108 Part 3  diseases and their control
10 Newcastle disease
10.1  Cause and impact
One of the major constraints to village chicken production is ND. In many 
countries, outbreaks of this disease regularly kill 50–100% of susceptible 
chickens. In countries where ND is common, outbreaks can occur once or  
twice a year. The fact that ND has a local name in many countries indicates  
the importance of this disease.
Newcastle disease is caused by a paramyxovirus that occurs in a range of  
types (or strains) of widely variable strength (virulence). Sometimes, the strain 
of virus present will cause very few deaths in chickens; at other times, the  
virus strain involved may cause many deaths. For example, if a farmer has  
10 chickens, then infection with a:
weak Nd virus may cause 
(i.e. lentogenic ND virus)
death of 1 of the 10 chickens
moderately strong Nd virus may cause 
(i.e. mesogenic ND virus)
death of 5 of the 10 chickens
very strong Nd virus may cause  
(i.e. velogenic ND virus)
death of all 10 chickens
10.2  Transmission
Newcastle disease is very contagious. This means that the disease can  
spread from one chicken to another very easily. The ND virus is passed  
in the bird’s droppings, breath and any discharge from its eyes or nose.
Although the ND virus can be destroyed (inactivated) quickly at temperatures 
above 8 ºC (i.e. the virus is ‘thermolabile’), it might survive for several months 
inside clumps of bird droppings.
Figure 30 illustrates some ways that ND virus can be spread (transmitted)  
from bird to bird:
•	 The droppings of a bird with ND can spread the virus.
•	 Dogs or predators can spread the virus by carrying a chicken carcass 
infected with ND to a different location and by distributing the uneaten  
parts (e.g. feathers and bones).
•	 If eggs come from or have contact with a chicken sick with ND, then the  
ND virus can contaminate the shell and be carried on the outside of the  
egg. Vertical transmission (spread from the mother hen to her chicks 
through the embryo) of ND virus has not been proven.
•	 Cars or other vehicles passing through an area where an ND outbreak  
is occurring could carry the ND virus to other areas on their tyres.
•	 Chicken organs, bones, intestines, feathers, feet or other parts or products 
from a sick chicken that have not been cooked can all carry the ND virus.
•	 People can carry the virus from one flock to another on their shoes or clothes.
109
Furthermore, the ND virus can be transmitted by:
•	 direct contact between infected birds
•	 inhalation of contaminated air by uninfected chickens
•	 intake of contaminated feed or water
•	 contact with infected wild birds
•	 contaminated chicken houses
•	 contaminated baskets, cages, hoes or other equipment.
the role of humans in the spread of Newcastle disease (Nd)
In areas where the movement of birds is not controlled, farmers often 
sell some of their birds before and/or during ND outbreaks. Birds that 
have come into contact with the ND virus can spread it to other birds 
in the market. So it is possible that healthy-looking birds purchased 
at the market could develop ND when taken home. People working 
in villages (e.g. farmers, vaccinators, traders, extension workers etc.) 
may also spread the disease by carrying ND virus on their shoes and 
equipment from households with sick birds to other households.  
 
 
 
Figure 30.  The Newcastle disease virus can be spread in many different ways 
through contact with infected animals and animal parts, and mechanical 
transmission of the virus via people and vehicles.
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
110 Part 3  diseases and their control
10.3 Species affected
As well as chickens, domestic poultry such as turkeys, guineafowl and 
pigeons may be affected by ND. Ducks are usually resistant to the disease  
but, on occasions, ducklings may be affected. Wild birds can also carry  
the ND virus.
10.4  Clinical signs
After contact with the ND virus, it usually takes 3–5 days for unprotected birds 
to show signs of illness. Sometimes, however, illness may occur within 2 days, 
and at other times it may take up to 15 days for clinical signs to appear.
The clinical signs of ND vary considerably according to the type (virulence and 
tropism) of the ND virus involved, the species, age and immune status of the 
bird, and environmental conditions. As a result, there are no clinical signs that 
are unique to ND (i.e. there are no pathognomonic signs). Indeed, chickens 
infected with virulent (strong) ND virus strains may die before any signs of 
illness are seen.
Signs of illness may include one or more of the following:  
•	 The chicken fluffs its feathers and appears to ‘have its coat dragging on 
the ground’ (Figure 31).
Figure 31.  Farmers in many parts of the world have observed that a chicken with 
Newcastle disease ‘has its coat dragging on the ground’.
•	 The chicken looks sleepy (lethargy) and does not eat (inappetence).
•	 The chicken has slight difficulty breathing (respiratory signs such as mild 
rales and snick can be detected by careful observation). 
•	 There is severe respiratory distress and gasping.
•	 The head and neck are swollen.
•	 There is greenish diarrhoea.
111
•	 Egg production decreases markedly. Sometimes deformed eggs are 
produced.
•	 When the disease is advanced, nervous signs such as shaking (tremor), 
torticollis (twisted neck), convulsions and paralysis of the wings and legs 
may be seen (Figure 32). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 32.  Torticollis is generally seen in chickens only when Newcastle disease 
is at an advanced stage.
•	 Mortality may be very high, often reaching 50–100% (Figure 33). 
 
Figure 33.  Newcastle disease or highly pathogenic avian influenza virus should be 
suspected when mortality of 50–100% is observed in a flock of chickens. 
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
112 Part 3  diseases and their control
10.5 Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem findings are characteristic but not definitive (i.e. not 
pathognomonic). Newcastle disease should be suspected if the following 
lesions are encountered, particularly if they occur in combination (and when  
the flock history is also consistent with ND):
•	 reddening (congestion) and clear watery fluid (mucous exudates) in the trachea
•	 congestion of the lungs (lungs are heavier than normal and sink in  
water/formalin)
•	 haemorrhages of the mucosa of the proventriculus
•	 haemorrhagic and necrotic ulceration of lymphoid patches of the intestine, 
caecal tonsils and bursa of Fabricius
•	 congested ovarian follicles in hens in lay.
10.6  Field diagnosis of Newcastle disease
Accurate field diagnosis of ND in village chickens is often difficult, but when it is 
achieved it will assist in determining the prevalence of ND in the area concerned.
Case definition
In regions where the disease is endemic (and highly pathogenic 
avian influenza is not present) and where a laboratory confirmation of 
Newcastle disease (ND) is not possible, an outbreak of Nd should 
be suspected when there is high mortality in three or more 
neighbouring chicken flocks.
To assist with diagnosis, it is best to separate cases according to the level of 
mortality observed:
•	 High mortality in flocks not vaccinated against Nd. When 50–100% of 
birds in a flock die with the clinical signs listed above, it is likely that the 
deaths were caused by virulent ND. Highly pathogenic avian influenza can 
also cause high mortality but HPAI is currently endemic in a few limited 
areas whereas ND is endemic in many countries worldwide. 
•	 High mortality in birds vaccinated against Nd. This circumstance 
requires detailed and rapid investigation. It must be determined if:
1) vaccination against ND was unsuccessful and, if so, why
 OR
2)  the birds have been infected with HPAI.
•	 low mortality. In circumstances of low mortality it is more difficult to 
diagnose the disease involved. In areas where the majority of chickens are 
vaccinated against ND or have survived a natural outbreak of the disease, 
113
infection with virulent ND virus will provoke mortality only in those  
chickens that are not immune. In this case, it is necessary to distinguish 
ND from other diseases that cause mortalities (such as IBD/Gumboro, fowl 
cholera and fowl pox). Unfortunately, there are no pathognomonic clinical 
signs or post-mortem lesions. When field diagnosis is not easy, it is always 
best to confirm the diagnosis by submitting the appropriate samples to  
a veterinary diagnostic laboratory.
10.7 Investigating vaccination failure
After chickens have been vaccinated, the extension worker or livestock  
officer may receive reports of illness or death in vaccinated birds. In most 
cases, the farmers will blame the vaccine and, unless such reports are 
investigated thoroughly and the reasons for the apparent failure of vaccination 
are established and discussed with the farmers, the success of future 
vaccination campaigns may be at risk.
Vaccination failure occurs when the chickens do not develop adequate 
antibody titres following vaccination and/or are susceptible to field disease. 
Many factors may be responsible for the apparent failure of the vaccine to 
protect the chickens: some are related to the vaccine, others to the way the 
vaccine was handled and administered, while others are associated with the 
chicken itself.
To help work out the cause of the apparent vaccination failure, ask the farmer 
or vaccinator to describe the problem. The following questions can be posed: 
•	 How many birds are sick or have died?
•	 What signs did they show?
•	 Are any birds still sick? (examine them if possible)
•	 Are any of the neighbours’ chickens sick? 
•	 What vaccine was used? (Does the farmer still have the vaccine bottle?)
If the farmer’s chickens were vaccinated using ND vaccine and show 
signs of another disease, for example fowl pox, then it is most likely that the 
vaccine is not responsible for the disease. Once ND has been controlled in a 
flock, other diseases may become more apparent.
If the farmer’s chickens were vaccinated using ND vaccine and show 
signs of ND, then further investigation is necessary. Ask the farmer:
•	 What vaccine was used? (Does the farmer still have the vaccine bottle?)
•	 When were the birds vaccinated?
•	 When did the chickens get sick?
•	 Were all the birds in the flock vaccinated?
•	 How was the vaccine given to the chickens?
•	 How was the vaccine stored?
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
114 Part 3  diseases and their control
If the farmer or vaccinator still has the vaccine bottle, read the label and record 
the name of the vaccine, its batch number and expiry date, and note any 
information about how it should be given. If the vaccine was given by dropper, 
ask the farmer if they still have the dropper.
Have you seen or used this vaccine previously? In some countries, 
counterfeit vaccines may be on the market and, if used, will not protect the 
chickens. Their sale should be reported to the authorities. 
If the vaccine is one you have encountered before, was it used within the 
expiry date? Vaccine used after it has expired cannot be relied on to protect 
chickens.
If the vaccine is one you have encountered before and it was used within 
the expiry date, was the vaccine correctly conserved before it was used? 
How was it stored? Most vaccines require a good cold chain to retain their 
activity. Only thermotolerant vaccines such as NDV4-HR and I-2 ND vaccines 
will withstand short periods outside a cold chain. 
If the vaccine was given to the chickens by any route other than 
that recommended by the manufacturer, or a diluent other than that 
recommended by the manufacturer was used, it is likely that the bird will not 
develop the expected long-lasting level of immunity.
If the vaccine was given to the chickens using a dropper or by any means 
other than that recommended by the manufacturer, check the number of 
drops delivered by the dropper (or return the dropper to the manufacturer 
for testing). If the chicken has not received an adequate dose of vaccine, it is 
likely that it will not develop the expected long-lasting level of immunity.
If the chickens became sick within 7 days of vaccination and other birds 
in the village are showing signs of ND, then it is most likely that the chickens 
were incubating ND at the time of vaccination and the vaccine cannot be 
expected to be effective.
If it is more than 4 months since the chickens were vaccinated and they 
are showing signs of ND, then it is most likely that their level of immunity has 
decreased and revaccination is necessary.
Finally, birds that are stressed, malnourished, immunosuppressed due to 
diseases such as IBD/Gumboro or Marek’s disease, or have severe parasitic 
infections, are unlikely to develop good immunity following vaccination. 
10.8  Controlling Newcastle disease
There is no known cure for ND and it cannot be controlled in villages without 
vaccination. Vaccination should be accompanied by good hygiene (keeping 
sanitary rules) and other general measures as described in Section 9.3.
Newcastle disease control combined with improved husbandry is often 
the most cost-effective means of improving village chicken production.
115
10.8.1 Newcastle disease vaccination
Several different vaccines have been developed to prevent ND (Table 13). This 
manual deals mainly with a vaccine called I-2, which was specially developed 
to cope with situations where it is difficult to store and keep vaccines cold.
Note: 
The example given below to explain how a vaccine works should 
be understood in most areas and by people who have limited 
scientific knowledge about how disease occurs. If you think that the 
story below may not be well received in a certain area, then please 
prepare an alternative explanation before the training session.
Giving a vaccine to a bird is like training soldiers to defend an area. The 
chicken can be thought of as the land to be protected, the vaccine contains 
the soldiers and the ND particle (virus) is the enemy. The soldiers first have to 
practise how to fight and to learn about the enemy so that they can win the 
battle. When soldiers arrive in a new area that needs to be protected, they 
must establish their lines of defence and collect information about the enemy 
that is causing problems. 
When we give the vaccine to the bird, the bird’s defence system is trained to 
recognise the ND virus as an enemy and establishes lines of defence against 
it. It takes around 7–14 days for the chicken to develop these lines of defence. 
The next time that the bird encounters the strong virus, the defence lines are 
already in place and so the strong virus cannot take over the bird’s body. The 
headquarters for the soldiers lies just behind the chicken’s eye and so when 
the vaccine is given by eye-drop, most of it goes straight to this centre. This is 
why eye-drop administration causes so strong a protective response. 
Table 13.  Comparison of Newcastle disease vaccine types
vaccine thermotolerance type Source Administration Period of 
protection
I-2 Thermotolerant Live Locally
produced or 
imported
Eye-drop,  
water supply
4 months
Ndv4-HR Thermotolerant Live Imported Eye-drop,  
water supply
4 months
la Sota Thermolabile Live Imported Eye-drop,  
water supply
4 months
Hitchner b1 Thermolabile Live Imported Eye-drop,  
water supply
4 months
ItA-NEw Thermotolerant Inactivated Imported Injection 6–12 months
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
116 Part 3  diseases and their control
When soldiers stay in one place without seeing the enemy for a long time  
they may get lazy and think that the enemy is not going to attack. If the 
soldiers forget to maintain their lines of defence, then the enemy could attack 
and defeat the soldiers. It is the same with vaccine. If we do not re-vaccinate 
birds every 4 months, the birds’ lines of defence against ND will get lazy and 
will be unable to fight the strong virus successfully.
•	 thermolabile vaccines. Thermolabile vaccines are very temperature-
dependent and should be used within a short time of being removed from 
the refrigerator. They will be ineffective if left outside of the refrigerator for 
longer than the time recommended by the manufacturer.
•	 thermotolerant vaccines. Thermotolerant vaccines are more tolerant to 
higher temperatures and can remain active outside of the refrigerator for 
longer periods. However, thermotolerant vaccines should still be handled 
with care and kept as cool as possible. 
•	 type. Live vaccines result in a wider range of immune responses in the 
bird than do inactivated vaccines, which is an advantage. However, live 
vaccines stimulate a shorter period of immunity.
•	 Source. Locally produced vaccines are made to suit local conditions 
and the revenue from their sale stays within the country.
•	 Administration. Injectable vaccines are more expensive to 
administer than vaccines delivered by eye-drop or via the chickens’  
water supply, since they require skilled and experienced operators.  
(There is also the risk of needle-stick injuries to humans, which is 
exacerbated in conditions where blood-borne diseases such as  
HIV/AIDS are prevalent.)
•	 Period of protection. Inactivated ND vaccines (e.g. ITA-NEW) provide 
a longer-lasting protection than the other vaccines. However, in a  
village environment, chicks are constantly hatching throughout the  
year. Under these circumstances it is better to administer the vaccine  
more regularly to adequately cover newly hatched birds. The 4-month 
protection period provided by live vaccines is therefore suitable for  
village chickens as flocks should be vaccinated at least three times  
per year. This is particularly so where ND outbreaks are not restricted  
to a certain season.
10.8.2 Storing and transporting the I-2 vaccine
The length of time that the I-2 vaccine can be stored inside or outside a 
refrigerator will vary from country to country according to the method used  
to prepare and transport the vaccine (e.g. Table 14). The leaflet provided with  
the vaccine will give recommendations for storage times and conditions.  
When you obtain a container (it might be a vial or an eye-dropper) of vaccine, 
always read the label. It is important to know how to store the vaccine and  
how long it can stay effective outside the refrigerator before and after the 
container is opened
.
117
Here are some general points for guidance:
•	 I-2 ND vaccine can keep its activity even if it stays outside the  
refrigerator for some time, but it must not be exposed to sunlight or 
allowed to get hot!
•	 Do NOT freeze the vaccine or put it into areas where ice forms. The 
vaccine does not tolerate very cold conditions. 
•	 Try to keep vaccine at a constant temperature. The vaccine will lose  
some of its activity with each change in temperature. When you  
store the vaccine in a refrigerator, do not place it in the door since  
it will be exposed to changes in temperature every time the refrigerator  
is opened.
•	 If the vaccine is placed in a reliable refrigerator (4–8 ºC), it will last until 
the expiry date on its label. However, once the vaccine has been removed 
from the refrigerator and allowed to warm, it will lose its activity before the 
expiry date.
•	 Transport the vaccine in the field using a cool box and ice pack if they  
are available. If they are not available, wrap the vial in a damp cloth and 
carry it in a covered, open-weave basket or any other container that  
allows the air to pass through in order to keep the vaccine cool and 
away from sunlight (Figure 34). An open-weave basket and a damp  
cloth will keep the vaccine cooler than a cool box without ice packs.
•	 Once the vial has been opened, it will last longer if it is kept cool (around 
22 ºC) but it should be used as quickly as possible.
Table 14.  Storage guidelines prepared using thermostability trial data and provided 
to users of I-2 vaccine in Mozambique
Storage temperature Safe storage interval
Freeze-dried vaccine wet vaccine
9–30 °C 2 months 2 weeks
Above 30 °C 2 weeks 2 days
•	 Outside a refrigerator, the unopened vaccine will last for 2 weeks as  
a ‘wet’ vaccine and 2 months in freeze-dried form if stored in a cool 
(around 22 °C or less), dark place. In villages, consider placing the 
vaccine container near the base of a clay water pot that is kept in a  
clean, dark place. The vaccine should also be stored in a way that 
prevents children from playing with it. If the unopened vaccine is allowed 
to get hot (above 30 °C), it will last for only 2 days in the wet form and 
2 weeks in the freeze-dried form.
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
118 Part 3  diseases and their control
Figure 34.  A covered, open-weave basket with a damp cloth inside is a good way to 
transport thermotolerant vaccine in the field.
10.8.3 Vaccinating chickens
Vaccinating chickens in a regular and effective manner is a complex activity 
that requires high-quality training and monitoring. Details of these activities can 
be found in the companion manual ‘Controlling Newcastle disease in village 
chickens: a training manual’ (Alders et al. 2002).
Method of administration 
It is recommended that I-2 vaccine be given by eye-drop, as the bird develops 
a stronger immunity when the vaccine enters via the eye. The vaccine can also 
be given via drinking water but birds then develop a weaker immune response. 
The vaccine must also be given more often if administered via drinking water 
and this makes vaccination more expensive. An additional problem is that the 
more aggressive birds may drink more water, resulting in the weaker birds 
receiving an inadequate dose of vaccine.
Some notes on eye-drop administration of vaccine follow:
1. Eye-drop vaccination is easier if at least two people (such as the farmer and 
the vaccinator), participate; one person can hold the chickens while the 
other vaccinates.
2. Check each chicken before vaccination to confirm that it is healthy. Sick 
chickens should not be vaccinated, as they will have a weaker immune 
response to the vaccine and so may still develop ND during an outbreak.
3. Birds should be out of direct sunlight when they are vaccinated (e.g. in the 
shade of a tree).
4. The dropper containing the vaccine should be held vertically above the 
chicken’s eye.
5. Place one drop in the eye of the chicken (Figure 35). Do not touch the bird’s 
eye with the tip of the dropper; a contaminated tip may transmit disease.
6. All healthy birds in a flock should be vaccinated (even newly hatched chicks).
7. To minimise the risk of spreading disease, wash your hands after visiting 
each flock and avoid walking in chicken droppings. 
119
Figure 35. When using an eye-dropper to administer Newcastle disease vaccine, 
hold it in a vertical position. Do not touch the eye with the tip of the dropper.
10.9 Reporting Newcastle disease
Newcastle disease is one of the most devastating diseases of chickens, 
and a combination of strict sanitary measures and vaccination is required to 
control it. Control measures for diseases such as ND are generally laid down 
in national control strategies and, because of their economic importance, the 
diseases are notifiable; that is, every outbreak of Nd must be reported to 
the local veterinary authorities who will report it to the appropriate national 
and international authorities. 
To ensure accurate reporting, the diagnosis of ND has to be as reliable 
as possible. Ideally, isolation and characterisation of ND virus should be 
performed at every primary outbreak. However, this is not practical under 
village conditions and a case definition has been formulated for ND (see 
Section 10.6). All cases that meet this definition should be considered as 
possible outbreaks of ND and followed up by further diagnostic procedures  
as described in Section 8.5.
10.10 Differential diagnosis of Newcastle disease  
 in village chickens
Newcastle disease can produce a range of signs in chickens, depending on 
the body system or organs affected. It therefore has to be distinguished from 
other diseases that affect the same body system or organs (see T able 12) and 
cause similar clinical signs or high mortality in chickens.
To assist extension workers in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of ND 
at village level, Table 15 summarises common diseases of village chickens 
according to the body system or organ and age group affected.
Chapter 10  Newcastle disease
120 Part 3  diseases and their control
Table 15.  Differential diagnosis of common diseases of village chickens
body system Age group disease
Respiratory system All age groups Newcastle disease (ND)A
Chronic respiratory diseaseB
Infectious coryzaB
MycoplasmosisB
Infectious bronchitisA
Highly pathogenic avian influenza  (HPAI)A
Chicks AspergillosisC
Growers, adults LaryngotracheitisA
Fowl choleraB (chronic form)
digestive system All age groups NDA
HPAIA
ColisepticemiaB
Infestation with helminths (usually more of a 
clinical problem in young birds)D
Chicks Pullorum diseaseB
Infectious bursal disease/GumboroA
CoccidiosisD
Growers Fowl typhoidB
CoccidiosisD
Adults Fowl typhoidB
Central nervous 
system
All age groups ND
A
HPAIA
Chicks Vitamin E deficiencyE
Growers, adults Marek’s diseaseA
Skin All age groups Fowl choleraB
Infestation with external parasitesD
Growers, adults Fowl poxA
urogenital system All age groups Infectious bronchitisA
Musculoskeletal 
system
All age groups Infectious synovitis
B (mycoplasmosis)
Fowl choleraB (chronic form)
Chicks Riboflavin (vitamin B) deficiencyE
Vitamin E deficiencyE
Vitamin D3 deficiency (rickets)E
Growers Marek’s diseaseA
Adults Marek’s diseaseA
Avian tuberculosisB
Eggs Hens NDA
Infectious bronchitisA
HPAIA
A Viral infection (cannot be treated)
B Bacterial infection (can be treated using effective antibiotics)
C Fungal infection (treatment possible but seldom successful)
D Caused by parasites (can be treated using effective antiparasitic drugs)
E Nutritional deficiency (can be treated by improving diet)
121
11 Other infectious diseases of  
 village chickens 
11.1 Introduction
Once ND is under control, other diseases that previously had little impact on 
the village chicken population will probably become more prominent. It is 
thought that the periodic severe outbreaks of ND that wipe out the whole flock 
also wipe out the pool of infection for other diseases. With effective ND control, 
increased flock sizes provide numerous hosts for any infectious agent, and 
increased trade in chickens and eggs might also contribute to the spread of 
infectious diseases.
Diseases related to poor nutrition might also become more important, since 
only a limited number of chickens may be able to obtain a balanced diet from 
the scavenging feed resource base (see Section 2.4).
In the south-eastern region of Africa, fowl pox appears to be the biggest 
potential problem, while in some parts of Asia, fowl cholera is widespread. 
Both diseases might gain importance once ND is under control but, because 
they have different methods of transmission, it is unlikely that either of them 
would ever become as severe as ND. Neither fowl cholera nor fowl pox spread 
over large areas or as quickly as ND. Apart from HPAI, this also applies to 
other diseases of village chickens.
Brief descriptions of a number of infectious diseases reported in village 
chickens are presented here. The diseases include those that should be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of ND, and those that might gain 
importance once ND is controlled. 
The clinical signs and post-mortem lesions of each disease are described, 
as are the cause, susceptible species and ways of transmission, in order to 
show how the disease spreads and what are effective control mechanisms. 
Chapter 9 gives general information on prevention and control of infectious 
diseases. The notes provided here should be considered as a guide and, 
wherever possible, appropriate technical assistance should be sought to 
confirm diagnoses.
The diseases in this chapter are covered in alphabetical order regardless 
of their impact on village chicken production. Table 16 lists the diseases, 
grouping them according to whether the causative agents are viruses, 
bacteria, fungi, mycoplasmas, or internal or external parasites.
122 Part 3  diseases and their control
Table 16 Poultry diseases grouped by causative agent, with the section in which they 
are covered this manual indicated
Causative agent Common name of disease Section
viruses
Paramyxovirus Newcastle disease 10
Influenza A virus Avian influenza (fowl plague) 11.2
Poxvirus Fowl pox 11.8
Birnavirus Infectious bursal disease (IBD)/ 
Gumboro disease
11.10
Coronavirus Infectious bronchitis 11.11
Herpesvirus Infectious laryngotracheitis 11.13
Herpesvirus Marek’s disease 11.14
bacteria
Escherichia coli (with Mycoplasma 
gallisepticum) 
Chronic respiratory disease 11.3
E. coli Colisepticaemia 11.5
Pasteurella multocida Fowl cholera (pasteurellosis) 11.7
Salmonella gallinarum Fowl typhoid 11.9
Salmonella pullorum Pullorum disease (bacillary white 
diarrhoea) 
11.15
Haemophilus paragallinarum Infectious coryza 11.12
Mycoplasmas
Mycoplasma gallisepticum Chronic respiratory disease 11.3
Internal parasites
Coccidiosis Coccidiosis 11.4
Ascaridia galli Roundworms 11.16
Capillaria Hairworms 11.16
Heterakis Caecal worms 11.16
Tapeworms Tapeworms 11.16
Gapeworms Gapeworms 11.16
External parasites
Echidnophaga gallinacea Stickfast flea 11.6.1
Chicken lice Lice 11.6.2
Knemidocoptes mutans Scale leg mites 11.6.3
Epidermoptes bilobatus 
Ornithonyssus sylviarum
Ornithonyssus bursa
Dermanyssus gallinae
Skin mites 11.6.4
Ticks Ticks 11.6.5
123
11.2 Highly pathogenic avian influenza (fowl plague)
Cause
Avian influenza is caused by influenza A virus. Influenza viruses can change 
their strength by mutation and re-assortment. Different subtypes of the 
influenza virus with reduced strength might not always cause a clinical 
disease. The very contagious and severe form of avian influenza is known  
as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
transmission
Influenza virus is shed in the droppings of, and any discharge from, infected 
birds. Although the virus can readily be destroyed by direct sunlight or heat,  
it may survive for several weeks in a pile of droppings.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds or contact with wild birds (agents in 
discharges and droppings are inhaled by other birds)
•	 by intake of contaminated feed or water
•	 between flocks, in infected dust particles
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people or on equipment (e.g. egg trays  
and cages).
Epidemiological studies in Thailand indicate that village flocks are at lower 
risk of HPAI infection than are small-scale and commercial-scale operations of 
broiler or layer chickens or quail.
Species affected
A wide variety of domestic and wild birds is susceptible, although clinical signs 
are observed mainly in chickens and turkeys. Ducks and geese may carry the 
virus without showing any signs.
Highly pathogenic avian influenza may affect humans, causing severe 
respiratory disease or even death.
2
Clinical signs
Clinical signs may occur within a few hours of infection and vary depending on 
the subtype of virus. Highly pathogenic avian influenza may wipe out a whole 
flock within days. Signs include:
•	 sudden death with few clinical signs
•	 ruffled feathers
•	 inappetence (not eating)
•	 distressed and noisy breathing, coughing and sneezing
•	 discharge from the eyes or nose
2  Under some conditions, the influenza virus can spread from ducks or chickens and adapt to other hosts. 
Pigs play an important role as hosts for some subtypes of the virus (but not H5N1) that originate in poultry 
and may affect humans.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
124 Part 3  diseases and their control
•	 swelling of the face, including combs and wattles
•	 drop in egg production
•	 soft-shelled eggs
•	 diarrhoea
•	 small haemorrhages under the skin (i.e. bruising; usually most visible on 
feet and legs)
•	 lameness
•	 twisted neck and tremors
•	 at least half of the flock dies within one week (50–100% mortality).
Incubation period
It is important to remember that immediately following infection a bird will 
appear healthy while the disease is in the incubation period. The incubation 
period for an individual bird is usually 2–7 days, depending on the strain of 
virus involved, the dose of virus received, and the species and age of the 
bird. In the case of HPAI H5N1, the incubation period is usually 2–5 days. The 
onset of severe disease in a flock of birds can take up to 18 days (Figure 36), 
especially in caged layers.
Post-mortem findings
If HPAI is suspected, it is important that personal protective equipment (PPE) 
be used if a post-mortem is conducted and that the post-mortem be done in a 
safe area away from the general public.
Post-mortem lesions are non-specific and include:
•	 small haemorrhages in lungs, air sacs, intestines, pancreas and heart
•	 small amounts of cheesy material between the intestines and on the liver 
and heart
•	 mucus or even bloody content in the trachea, sinuses and perhaps in the 
nasal cavity.
If birds died quickly, gross lesions may not be found.
diagnosis
Avian influenza cannot be diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs alone. The 
diagnosis can be confirmed only by laboratory examination to confirm presence 
of the virus or, in certain circumstances, to detect specific antibodies to the virus. 
Highly pathogenic avian influenza should be suspected when there is high 
mortality in chickens that have been vaccinated against ND within the previous 
4 months.
differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of HPAI varies according to the poultry production 
system (Table 17).
125
Figure 36.  The development of clinical signs of avian influenza (AI) in a flock can 
take 2–18 days. Note that an infected bird can spread virus before it starts  
to show signs of sickness.
2–18 DAYS
AI 
VIRUS
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
126 Part 3  diseases and their control
Table 17.  Diseases other than highly pathogenic avian influenza that cause sudden 
high mortality or swelling of combs and wattles in chickens, grouped by 
production system
Clinical signs Intensive production Extensive production
Diseases causing 
sudden high 
mortality
Newcastle disease
Infectious laryngotracheitis
Infectious bursal disease/Gumboro disease
Acute fowl cholera
Duck plague (duck virus enteritis)
Acute poisonings
Newcastle disease
Acute fowl cholera
Duck plague (duck virus 
enteritis)
Acute poisonings
Diseases causing 
swelling of combs 
and wattles
Acute/chronic fowl cholera and other 
septicaemic diseases
Bacterial cellulitis of the comb and wattles
Acute/chronic fowl cholera 
and other septicaemic 
diseases
Bacterial cellulitis of the 
comb and wattles
Action plan for when HPAI is suspected 
If you suspect a case of HPAI, remain calm and implement the guidelines 
provided by your local veterinary services. If you do not have guidelines 
available, the following actions should be implemented as quickly as possible. 
Quick and appropriate actions can prevent the spread of the disease.
1. Speak with the farmers, village leaders, health officials and nearest police 
officers to ensure that:
(i)  the affected flock(s) is isolated and quarantined 
(ii)  all movement of poultry and pigs from the village stops immediately
(iii) other flocks of poultry in the village are confined as much as possible.
2. Send an urgent message to the relevant veterinary authority asking them 
to come and investigate the outbreak.
3. Children, the elderly and sick people should have no contact with sick or 
dead birds. Any people who have been in contact with sick, dying or dead 
birds should be monitored for signs of illness and any illness reported to 
the medical services.
Avian influenza in humans should be suspected where an 
individual has:
•	 a body temperature of over 38 °C
•	 at least one of the following signs—muscle pain, cough, breathing 
difficulty, or shortness of breath
•	 has been in direct contact with sick or dead poultry in the preceding 
7 days, lives in an area where unusual poultry deaths have been 
reported in the last 14 days, or has been looking after a pneumonia 
patient in the 10 days before the onset of the illness.
127
4. Sick and dead birds should not be eaten by people or predators. They 
should be buried or, if they cannot be buried, burnt. When burying in a pit, 
place 40 cm of soil on top of the carcasses, followed by a layer of agricultural 
lime or wood ash, then complete filling in the pit with more soil. Lime should 
not be placed directly on the carcasses as it slows decomposition.
5. Remind villagers to wash their hands with soap frequently. Clothes and items 
(e.g. water containers, feeders, cages etc.) that have come into contact with 
sick or dead birds should be dealt with in one or other of the following ways:
(i) put in a pile to await the arrival of the investigation team—place lime or 
wood ash under and over the pile
(ii) washed with detergent or disinfectant—contaminated clothing and 
equipment should not be washed near water sources used by the 
community or water birds
(iii) boiled in water for 5 minutes. 
6. Together with the villagers, identify a site suitable for the construction 
of a pit for the disposal of carcasses away from community wells and 
watercourses. In collaboration with the village leader, arrange for one or 
more pits to be dug.
7. Collect a history of the movement of birds (including both domestic and 
wild birds) in the area over the previous month to inform the investigating 
team. Record when the last vaccination campaign against ND was 
conducted and which farmers participated in the campaign.
8. If you have PPE issued by the veterinary authority, collect the dead birds 
into a central location on each farm or around each house where dead 
birds are located. Remember to disinfect your boots before you move 
between contaminated locations.
9. If you do not have appropriate PPE, work with community leaders and 
local authorities to restrict the movement of people and animals onto the 
farm or area where the dead birds are located and wait for the investigation 
team to arrive.
10. Remember that high concentrations of HPAI virus can be present in the 
droppings (i.e. manure) of infected birds. Special care should be taken 
when handling manure or material contaminated with manure.
Prevention
Section 9.3 provides general advice on the prevention of disease in village 
flocks. In countries free of HPAI it is important that:
•	 border inspection services conduct regular surveillance
•	 the legislation on trade in wild birds is enforced
•	 the legislation on movement of poultry and poultry products is enforced
•	 groups of poultry traders be formed and training conducted on HPAI and 
how it can it be prevented and controlled
•	 meetings are held with owners of fighting cocks to raise their awareness of 
the risk from HPAI, with special emphasis on border areas.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
128 Part 3  diseases and their control
Control
Avian influenza cannot be cured. Avian influenza is a notifiable disease 
because of its immense impact on poultry-keeping systems and potential 
impact on human health, and outbreaks must be reported to the veterinary 
authorities.
Initial response
Early detection of outbreaks is essential for the control of HPAI. 
Following a confirmed laboratory diagnosis of HPAI, all birds on infected 
commercial farms, in infected village flocks and in high-risk contact areas 
are culled. This should be done rapidly and efficiently, in accordance with 
the national contingency plan. Good records must be kept to facilitate the 
payment of compensation to farming families.
Heavily contaminated manure represents a special problem in efforts to 
control influenza. Litter and manure can be disposed of by burial or rendered 
safe by composting in a pile covered with plastic.
widespread outbreaks
Should HPAI spread and become endemic, then veterinary authorities may 
introduce the vaccination of poultry. The selection of the vaccine should be 
done in accordance with international FAO/OIE guidelines.
vaccinated birds can still spread highly pathogenic  
avian influenza
Vaccinated birds can still be infected with virulent strains of  
HPAI and shed virulent virus without showing clinical signs of 
disease. However, the amount of virus shed will be less than  
that from non-vaccinated infected birds.
disinfection
Soaps and disinfectants can inactivate the virus on contact with it. The 
strength and freshness of the disinfectant solution will influence the time 
required for virus inactivation, and so the manufacturer’s instructions 
should be followed closely. The presence of organic material will reduce the 
effectiveness of disinfectants and so it is important to remove as much soil and 
manure as possible from cages, feeders, vehicles etc. before doing the final 
disinfection. Organic material removed from contaminated premises should  
be buried or composted. 
Agricultural lime (i.e. powdered lime) and wood ash will inactivate the virus 
and are especially useful in chicken houses with earthen floors. The powdered 
lime or wood ash should be placed on the earthen floor and allowed to remain 
there for at least 2 days.
129
the difference between antiseptics, disinfectants and antibiotics
Antiseptics are physical or chemical agents that kill or inhibit the 
growth of micro-organisms on the external surfaces of the body. 
Some common antiseptics are alcohol, iodine, hydrogen peroxide 
and boric acid. Germicides are antiseptics that kill micro-organisms. 
There is great variation in the ability of antiseptics to destroy  
micro-organisms, and in their effect on living tissue. Mercuric 
chloride, for example, is a powerful antiseptic, but it irritates  
delicate tissue. In contrast, silver nitrate kills fewer germs but can  
be used on the delicate tissues of the eyes and throat. There is  
also a great difference in the time required for different antiseptics  
to work. Iodine, one of the fastest-working antiseptics, kills  
bacteria within 30 seconds. Other antiseptics have slower, more 
residual action.
disinfectants are agents which destroy micro-organisms found 
on non-living objects. Some common disinfectants are Virkon®,  
70% alcohol and washing soda.
Antibiotics are agents that are used to treat infections in people 
and animals caused by bacteria and other micro-organisms. 
Source: <http://www.biology-online.org/dictionary/Antibiotic> and ‘The Columbia electronic encyclopedia’, 6th ed. 
Copyright © 2006, Columbia University Press.
Public health
People may be infected with avian influenza virus. In general, those infected 
with the currently circulating strain of H5N1 HPAI virus have suffered severe 
respiratory disease, and death has occurred in over 50% of reported cases. 
The emergence, by re-assortment or mutation, of a highly pathogenic strain of 
influenza A which could transmit between people to cause a global pandemic 
is a matter of the gravest international concern. The most effective means of 
protecting human welfare is to combat the precursor virus in its avian hosts so 
as to prevent the opportunities for infection of other species and emergence of 
a pandemic strain.
do not inhale the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus
very poor protection: A cotton scarf tied over the nose will filter out 
approximately only 10% of any virus particles that are present in the air. 
Poor protection: A dust mask will filter out around 13% of virus particles. 
Excellent protection: The N95 (or P2) protective mask supplied with the 
personal protective equipment kit will filter out 95% of virus particles.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
130 Part 3  diseases and their control
11.3  Chronic respiratory disease
Cause
Chronic respiratory disease (CRD) is caused by several infectious agents 
that affect the respiratory tract. In general, Escherichia coli and a bacteria-like 
organism called Mycoplasma gallisepticum are involved, but the infection 
is often complicated by chronic stress and the presence of other bacteria  
or viruses.
transmission
The agents are shed in discharges from the eyes and nose of infected birds 
and can survive outside a bird (in droplets of discharge) for up to 3 days.
The disease is spread:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents in discharges may be inhaled by 
other birds)
•	 via the air (but not over long distances)
•	 by carrier birds (chickens that have recovered from CRD can shed the 
causative agents for a long time)
•	 via the egg from infected hens to their chicks (i.e. vertical transmission).
Species affected
Chronic respiratory disease affects chickens, guineafowl, turkeys  
and other birds
Clinical signs
Clinical signs of CRD may be observed as early as 1 day after infection and 
are long lasting. Normally CRD spreads slowly through a flock causing mild 
respiratory disease characterised by: 
•	 discharge from nose and eyes
•	 coughing or sneezing
•	 respiratory sounds
•	 swollen head
•	 reduced egg production.
A few birds may die. Signs may be more severe if the chickens are already 
suffering from other diseases.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem evidence of CRD includes:
•	 mucus in the trachea and sinuses
•	 reddish trachea
•	 thickened air sacs with cheesy content.
131
Control
Chronic respiratory disease can be treated using antibiotics but the  
disease may recur after treatment ends. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on the prevention and control  
of infectious diseases.
11.4  Coccidiosis
Cause
Coccidiosis is caused by microscopic protozoan parasites called coccidia.  
In chickens there are several different coccidian species belonging to the 
genus Eimeria that may affect various parts of the intestine.
transmission
Coccidia are shed in the droppings of infected birds and, in humid or wet 
environments, they can survive for up to a year. Other birds are infected by 
eating the coccidia.
The disease is spread:
•	 by contact with infected droppings
•	 by contact with feed or water that has been contaminated by faeces
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people or on equipment.
Species affected
Domestic poultry and birds are affected by coccidiosis. The species of  
Eimeria that affect poultry are host-specific, meaning that a species that 
infects chickens does not infect, for example, turkeys and vice versa. 
Clinical signs
Coccidiosis can affect all age groups but is most serious in young birds,  
in which mortality rates can be as high as 50%.
Clinical signs can be seen 4–6 days after infection and are characterised by:
•	 depression and listlessness
•	 diarrhoea
•	 loss of weight
•	 bloody droppings (in some cases)
•	 a pale comb.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem evidence of coccidiosis includes:
•	 lesions (grey–whitish patches, small haemorrhages) in the affected  
part of the intestines
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
132 Part 3  diseases and their control
•	 cheesy or mucous content in the intestines
•	 ballooning of the intestines.
Control
Infected flocks may be treated with coccidiostats if available. Nevertheless,  
the use of such agents without further measures to reduce the risk of  
re-infection will provide only a short, temporary improvement.
The most effective control measure is to minimise the risk of infection  
by keeping the number of coccidia in the chickens’ environment as low  
as possible. The improvement of housing conditions (as described in  
Chapter 4) will greatly help in the control of coccidiosis: to minimise  
re-infection, remove the droppings daily, keep the chicken house clean  
and dry, and avoid overcrowding. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on the prevention and control  
of infectious diseases.
11.5 Colisepticaemia
Cause
Colisepticaemia is caused by a bacterium called Escherichia coli. Other 
infectious agents and non-infectious factors (particularly poor husbandry)  
may predispose the bird to infection.
transmission
The causative agent is shed in the droppings. 
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents in the droppings may be inhaled 
by other birds)
•	 via the air
•	 by contact with contaminated feed or water
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment 
•	 via the egg from infected hens to their chicks. This is common and may 
cause high chick mortality. 
Species affected
All types of birds can be affected. The disease is reported most commonly  
in chickens, turkeys and ducks, but may also occur in guineafowl.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs may be seen 1–2 days after infection, mainly in young  
chicks, and include:
•	 weakness
•	 diarrhoea
•	 emaciation in growers
133
•	 lameness in growers (occasionally)
•	 heavy breathing in growers (occasionally).
Older chickens are better able to fight this disease, provided they are in good 
health and have good nutrition.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem evidence of colisepticaemia includes:
•	 remnant egg yolk (persistent yolk sac) in the body cavity of young chicks
•	 fine cheesy layer on the intestines, liver and heart.
Control
Treatment using antibiotics is possible. Since the quality of husbandry 
practised plays an important role in the occurrence of colisepticaemia, 
improved husbandry and sanitary measures, as described in chapters  
4 and 9, are very important in control of this disease. 
Public health
While the organism is essentially specific to birds, there is a very low risk  
of people and other animals contracting the disease.
11.6  External parasites (fleas, mites etc.)
Infestation with external parasites is a common problem in free-range systems. 
High levels of infestation irritate the birds and cause scratching, preening, 
reduced productivity and sometimes anaemia. External parasites can also 
transmit infectious diseases such as fowl pox.
The most common external parasites (Figure 37) are described in this section 
so that extension staff will be able to identify the causative agents and control 
infestations.
General control measures:
•	 Remove bark from timber used in the chicken house so that parasites 
cannot hide underneath.
•	 Avoid crowded housing.
•	 Clean the shelter and the nests regularly and thoroughly; all bedding, litter 
and droppings must be removed.
•	 Spread ash or agricultural lime on the floors and walls of chicken shelters 
and nests.
•	 Use smoke to fumigate shelter and nests regularly.
•	 In the case of severe infestation, the chicken house and nests should be 
burnt and a new house built at a different location.
•	 Allow the chickens to bathe in fire ash.
•	 Use an insecticidal dusting powder or spray if available.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
134 Part 3  diseases and their control
Remember:
•	 all birds must be treated at the same time otherwise parasites from 
untreated birds will soon spread back to the birds you have treated
•	 apply insecticidal spray or powder to the nests and the chicken house as 
well, since ticks, some mites and fleas do not live constantly on the bird
•	 repeat the treatment after 1 week. (Insecticides do not kill the eggs of 
mites. In the eggs, young mites develop within 1 week.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 37.  Diagram showing the areas on the body where different types of 
external parasites of chickens are most likely to be found
11.6.1  Fleas
The most common flea found on chickens in tropical and subtropical areas is 
the stickfast flea (Echidnophaga gallinacea), a small, dark parasite that sticks 
in clusters to the skin of the bird’s head (mainly around the eyes).
The eggs and young of the stickfast flea are found in the surroundings of the 
chickens, where they feed on dry blood, faeces or other organic material. 
Adult fleas stay on the bird permanently and feed on blood. Stickfast fleas may 
survive for weeks without food.
Clinical signs
The following signs are typical of infestation with fleas:
•	 birds are irritated and restless, and may scratch at the eyes
•	 the skin, comb and wattles are pale due to blood loss
•	 there are crusted skin lesions where many fleas had stuck.
Chicks that are severely infested with fleas may die.
LiceStickfast flea
Ticks and  
skin mites
Scaly leg 
mites
135
Control
To control fleas, the following steps should be taken:
•	 Kerosene, paraffin or petroleum jelly should be applied to the parasites 
several times a day (Figure 38). Within a short period, the fleas will die. 
Dead fleas might remain attached to the chicken for several days or  
even weeks.
•	 Brooding hens should be kept free from fleas to prevent infestation of 
young chicks.
•	 The general measures for control of external parasites (see above)  
should be adopted.
 
 
 
Figure 38. Application of paraffin to stickfast fleas using a feather
11.6.2 Lice
Lice are light yellowish-brown, cigar-shaped parasites of various sizes that can 
be found all over the body on the feathers. They stay permanently on the bird, 
and their small greyish eggs are attached in clusters to the feathers. Most lice 
feed on feathers; some species suck blood. 
Clinical signs
The following signs are typical of infestation with lice:
•	 feathers are damaged
•	 birds may be irritated if the infestation is severe. 
Control
The general control measures for external parasites (see above) should  
be followed.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
136 Part 3  diseases and their control
11.6.3  Scaly leg mites
Scaly leg mites (Knemidocoptes mutans) burrow into and live in the skin 
on birds’ legs and cause readily recognisable scales and deformation of the  
legs and feet.
Clinical signs
Chickens carrying scaly leg mites display thick scaly legs. In cases of severe 
infestation, lameness or malformation of the feet may occur.
Control
Scaly leg mites are difficult to treat. Soften the scales in water, then scrub  
them off and treat the legs with kerosene (also known as paraffin in some parts 
of the world), mineral oil (e.g. used engine oil; Figure 39), Vaseline  
or an insecticide. Repeat this procedure at least three times at weekly 
intervals. If it does not help, slaughter the bird.
In addition, the general control measures for external parasites should be 
followed.
 
Figure 39.  Application of engine oil to a chicken leg infested with scaly leg mites
11.6.4  Skin mites
Skin mites (Epidermoptes bilobatus) are tiny (about 1 mm long), dark, fast-
moving, blood-sucking parasites. They prefer those parts of the chicken’s 
body with few feathers, such as the head and under the wings.
There are several types of mites. Species such as Ornithonyssus sylviarum 
and O. bursa remain permanently on the bird, whereas other species, such 
as Dermanyssus gallinae, hide in nests or cracks in buildings where birds 
are living and emerge to suck blood only at night. Skin mites can live up  
to 8 months without a blood meal.
137
Clinical signs
The following signs are typical of skin mite infestation:
•	 birds are irritated and become thin and weak
•	 productivity falls (hens might even stop laying eggs or brooding)
•	 the skin, comb and wattles are pale due to blood loss.
Severely infested birds, especially chicks, may die.
Control
To control skin mites:
•	 remove the bark from timber used to construct shelters (to reduce hiding 
sites for the mites)
•	 lime perches and structures
•	 follow the general control measures for external parasites (see above).
11.6.5  Ticks
Ticks are small, blue or brownish, blood-sucking parasites that can be found 
on the skin, especially in parts of the body with few feathers, such as the head 
and under the wings.
Off the bird, they live in cracks, under the bark of branches used to build 
shelters, walls or trees where they also lay their eggs. Nymphs usually feed at 
night and can survive without food for as long as 15 months. Adult ticks can 
survive for more than 4 years without feeding on the blood of a bird.
Clinical signs
The following signs are typical of tick infestation:
•	 birds are irritated and become thin and weak
•	 productivity falls (hens may even stop laying eggs)
•	 the skin, comb and wattles are pale due to blood loss.
Control
To control ticks:
•	 remo
ve the bark from timber used to construct shelters (to reduce 
hiding sites)
•	 follow the general control measures for external parasites (see above).
11.7  Fowl cholera (pasteurellosis)
Cause
Fowl cholera is caused by a bacterium called Pasteurella multocida.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
138 Part 3  diseases and their control
transmission
The agent is shed in discharges and droppings of infected birds. It can  
survive up to 30 days in water or soil, but is destroyed by direct sunlight,  
heat and drying.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between infected birds (infective agents in discharges 
and droppings are inhaled by other birds or enter via wounds)
•	 by intake of contaminated feed or water
•	 by contact with infected wild birds or farm animals
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people or on equipment.
Species affected
All poultry species are susceptible to fowl cholera although chickens and 
turkeys are the most prone to clinical disease.
Clinical signs
Fowl cholera usually affects birds that are more than 6 weeks old. Birds  
get sick 2–10 days after contact with the causative agent.
The acute form of the disease causes high mortality within a few days 
and birds may show no clinical signs. Characteristic signs of chronic fowl 
cholera are:
•	 many birds are tired and weak
•	 ruffled feathers, decreased appetite
•	 bluish comb and wattles 
•	 swollen face and wattles
•	 swollen joints
•	 fast, distressed breathing
•	 coughing and sneezing
•	 clear to yellow discharge from eyes and beak
•	 watery diarrhoea and dirty vent.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of fowl cholera include:
•	 small haemorrhages in the lungs, intestines and heart
•	 cheesy material between the intestines, and on the liver and heart
•	 fluid in the pericardial sac and abdominal cavity.
Control
Good flock management that includes barring entry of sick birds, and 
the quarantining of new birds is advised. If the disease cannot be quickly 
controlled, it is better to cull the entire flock.
139
Treatment using antibiotics is possible but mortality may reappear soon after 
treatment stops. Antibiotics that can be used include sulfur drugs in water (not 
recommended as they will affect the reproductive organs), oxytetracycline 
(Terramycin®), Aureomycin ®, novoviocin, lincomycin, spectinomycin in feed. 
Note that if these antibiotics are used, the withdrawal period is a minimum of 
10 days before slaughter for consumption. 
Vaccination is possible but does not always provoke good levels of protection. 
An inactivated vaccine using a local strain in an oil adjuvant can be produced 
by appropriately equipped laboratories. Village poultry should be vaccinated 
from 3 months of age onwards and best results are obtained when a booster 
is given 2 weeks after the first vaccination. Adequate flock protection can 
be achieved by conducting two campaigns of double vaccination (i.e. two 
vaccinations 2 weeks apart) per year. 
Fowl cholera vaccine must be stored correctly
Inactivated fowl cholera vaccine must be stored at 2–8 °C, not 
frozen. If frozen, the walls of the fowl cholera bacteria will rupture 
releasing endotoxin that can result in the death of chickens  
following injection.
Chapter 9 provides general information on the prevention and control of 
infectious diseases. 
11.8  Fowl pox
Cause
Fowl pox is caused by a poxvirus.
transmission
The virus is contained in the characteristic scabs found on chickens affected 
by the disease. It can survive in dried scabs for months or years. 
The disease spreads:
•	 via scabs which fall off the skin
•	 by direct contact between birds (The virus enters birds through skin 
wounds, via the eye or by inhalation. A rooster can transmit the disease  
by scratching and biting the hen while mating.)
•	 via insect bites (red mites, mosquitoes)
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment.
Species affected
Fowl pox affects chickens only (pox in other animals is caused by other types 
of poxviruses).
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
140 Part 3  diseases and their control
Clinical signs
Chickens of all age groups can be infected, but older birds are most 
commonly affected. The disease usually develops slowly over 2–3 weeks. 
Flock mortality is usually low but, in severe cases, up to half of the flock may 
die from fowl pox.
Wart-like lesions develop on the skin (‘skin form’) or inside the mouth 
(‘wet form’, ‘diphtheric form’). Lesions can also be found on other parts 
of the body, such as the cloaca, skin of the wings or legs, but  
typical are:
•	 yellowish to dark-brown lesions on the head, particularly on the  
comb and wattles and around the eyes
•	 yellow–white, cheesy-looking lesions inside the mouth and on the tongue, 
maybe also inside the trachea and oesophagus (these lesions can grow 
together and block the bird’s throat, and some birds may die because they 
cannot eat and breathe).
Skin lesions usually heal in 2 weeks. Birds that have recovered from fowl pox 
are usually immune and rarely get the disease again.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem examination may reveal yellow–white lesions inside the 
oesophagus and trachea or in the cloacal region. 
Control
There is no specific treatment for fowl pox. Vaccination is possible if the 
vaccine and cold chain facilities are available. Fowl pox vaccine is usually 
applied by the wing-web method to 4-week-old chickens. Vaccination 
produces a mild form of the disease and should be applied strictly in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Once the vaccine vial is 
opened, its contents must be used within 2 hours.
Birds with mild lesions may survive if well cared for (by providing shelter,  
feed and water).
Chapter 9 provides general information on the prevention and control of 
infectious diseases. 
11.9  Fowl typhoid
Cause 
Fowl typhoid is caused by a bacterium called Salmonella gallinarum.
transmission
The agent is shed in the droppings and can survive several months  
in the soil, dust or bedding. It is destroyed quickly when exposed to  
direct sunlight.
141
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (via the beak or through wounds)
•	 by contact with contaminated feed or water
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people or on equipment
•	 from infected hens to their chicks via the egg.
Species affected
Chickens, turkeys and guineafowl can contract fowl typhoid, which mainly 
affects adult birds but can cause mortality as high as 26% in chicks during the 
first month of life.
Clinical signs
Many older birds are affected, but normally only a few die. Clinical signs, 
which develop 2–5 days after infection, are:
•	 yellowish diarrhoea
•	 listlessness
•	 rough feathers and drooping wings.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of fowl typhoid include:
•	 swollen liver, spleen and kidneys, with small haemorrhages
•	 small white spots in the liver, heart and sometimes the lungs
•	 in chronic cases, cheesy material between the intestines, on the liver and 
heart
•	 misshapen, grey–greenish follicles on the ovary.
Control
Treatment with antibiotics is possible but no antibiotic or combination of 
antibiotics has been found capable of eliminating infection from a treated 
flock. It is therefore best to kill birds that seem to be sick with fowl typhoid. If 
the bird is eaten inadvertently, it is unlikely to cause a problem provided that 
the meat was well cooked. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of infectious 
diseases.
11.10  Infectious bursal disease/Gumboro disease
Cause
Infectious bursal disease (IBD)/Gumboro disease is caused by a birnavirus. 
Different strains of the virus are recognised and typing is required if control by 
vaccination is being considered.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
142 Part 3  diseases and their control
transmission
The virus is shed in the droppings and is very stable. It may survive up to  
4 months in the environment.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents are inhaled by other birds)
•	 by contact with contaminated feed or water
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment
•	 from infected hens to their chicks via the egg. 
Insects may act as carriers.
Species affected
Chickens and turkeys are susceptible to IBD/Gumboro.
Clinical signs
While birds of all age groups are susceptible to IBD/Gumboro, only birds 
between 3 and 12 weeks of age show clinical signs. Signs develop 2–3 
days after infection. They include: 
•	 depression and listlessness
•	 birds huddling together 
•	 pale skin
•	 diarrhoea and a dirty vent.
Depending on the strain involved, mortality can vary from 30% to 90%. 
Antibodies to IBD are frequently found in 30–40% of village chickens but 
clinical disease is rarely seen. (Note that the presence of antibodies indicates 
that the bird has been infected but does not necessarily that it became sick 
from the infection.)
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of IBD/Gumboro include:
•	 haemorrhages under the skin and in the breast and thigh muscles
•	 pale kidneys
•	 an enlarged, gelatinous, bursa of Fabricius (an organ that is part of the bird’s 
immune system) with bloody spots; at a later stage the bursa shrinks.
Control
There is no specific treatment for IBD/Gumboro. Vaccination is possible but 
not practicable under village conditions. Since there are various strains of 
IBD/Gumboro virus, if vaccination is considered, the causative strain must be 
determined to ensure that the vaccine specific to that strain is administered. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases. 
143
Birds between 3 and 12 weeks of age that survive the disease will be more 
susceptible to other diseases because of damage to their immune system.
11.11  Infectious bronchitis
Cause
Infectious bronchitis (IB) is caused by a coronavirus.
transmission
The virus is shed with discharges and is readily destroyed outside the bird.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (virus is inhaled by other birds)
•	 with infected dust particles from flock to flock
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment.
Species affected
Infectious bronchitis affects only chickens.
Clinical signs
All age groups are affected. While the disease is highly contagious and will 
affect almost all birds in a flock, it is most severe in young chicks in which it 
may cause many deaths.
Birds show clinical signs within 2 days of infection. While younger birds show 
mainly respiratory signs, hens often display only a drop in egg production. The 
following are signs typical of IB: 
•	 Young chicks may die following severe respiratory distress.
•	 Young chickens may have heavy and noisy breathing, and have open 
beaks. 
•	 Coughing and sneezing may be evident in young chickens.
•	 There is a drop in egg production.
•	 Deformed eggs with wrinkled and rough shells are laid.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of IB include:
•	 a red trachea containing mucus
•	 froth in air sacs
•	 a yellow, cheesy plug at the end of the trachea of younger chickens.
Virus subtypes that affect the kidneys and result in high mortality cause:
•	 pale, swollen kidneys
•	 white, sand-like material in the ureter (the vessel connecting the kidneys 
with the cloaca).
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
144 Part 3  diseases and their control
Control
Birds infected with IB subtypes causing renal damage should be protected 
from the cold and provided with electrolytes in the drinking water. This will 
lower mortality significantly. Vaccination is possible but not practicable under 
village conditions.
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases.
11.12  Infectious coryza
Cause
Infectious coryza is caused by a bacterium called Haemophilus paragallinarum.
transmission
The agent is shed in discharges from the nose and eyes but can survive only a 
short time outside the bird.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents are inhaled by other birds)
•	 by intake of contaminated feed or water
•	 with infected dust particles dispersing from flock to flock
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment
•	 by carrier birds (infected adult birds that are not showing signs but may 
introduce the disease into a new flock).
Species affected
Infectious coryza affects chickens, guineafowl and pheasants.
Clinical signs
Birds of all age groups are affected but the disease is generally more severe in 
older birds.
Clinical signs occur 1–3 days after infection. The disease can last from a few 
days to 2–3 months, although many birds show clinical signs that disappear 
after 14–21 days. Signs of infectious coryza include:
•	 distressed and noisy breathing
•	 sneezing
•	 a nasal discharge that is clear at first but later becomes yellowish  
and foul-smelling
•	 discharge from the eyes—the eyelids may stick together
•	 birds shaking their heads (to get rid of the discharge)
•	 swelling of the face.
Infectiouse coryza does not usually kill many birds, but feed and water intake 
are reduced and the birds lose weight.
145
Post-mortem findings
Watery discharges can be found in the nasal passages and sinuses  
of diseased birds.
Control
Infectious coryza can be treated using antibiotics such as oxytetracycline 
but drug resistance does develop. Relapse may occur following treatment. 
Commercial vaccine is available in some countries.
Avoid exposing birds to humid and cold conditions, which increase the 
severity of this disease.
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases.
11.13  Infectious laryngotracheitis 
Cause
Infectious laryngotracheitis (ILT) is caused by a herpesvirus.
transmission
The virus is shed with discharges and can survive in droppings and carcasses.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents are inhaled by other birds)
•	 via the air
•	 by contact with contaminated feed or water
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment
•	 by carrier birds (which may carry the virus for life).
Species affected
Infectious laryngotracheitis affects only chickens. 
Clinical signs
All age groups of chickens are affected but the most characteristic signs are 
seen in adult birds.
Clinical signs occur 6–15 days after infection and include:
•	 gasping with stretched neck and open beak 
•	 wheezing and gurgling respiratory sounds, and severe respiratory distress
•	 coughing and sneezing
•	 conjunctivitis
•	 drop in egg production.
Up to half of the flock may die after severe respiratory distress.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
146 Part 3  diseases and their control
Post-mortem findings
Bloody mucus and cheesy material may be found in the tracheae of diseased birds.
Control
There is no specific treatment for ILT . Vaccination is possible but not practicable 
under village conditions. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases.
11.14 Marek’s disease
Cause
Marek’s disease (MD) is caused by a herpesvirus.
transmission
The virus is shed with small parts of the feathers, fluff and dust. It can remain 
infectious for more than a year. 
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between birds (agents are inhaled by other birds)
•	 via the air
•	 by contact with contaminated feed or water
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment.
Species affected
Marek’s disease affects domestic fowl including chickens, quail and pheasants. 
Young chicks are particularly susceptible to MD but resistance increases rapidly 
after the first few days of age.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs can be seen from 2 to more than 30 weeks after infection.  
They include: 
•	 loss of feathers, nodules in the skin (in young birds from 4 weeks to  
7 months of age)
•	 paralysis of one leg and/or wings (up to 7 months of age)
•	 loss of weight
•	 irregularly shaped pupils (in adult birds)
•	 lameness for a short period (in adult birds).
Mortality usually occurs between 10 and 20 weeks of age.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of MD are:
•	 tumours in internal organs such as the ovary, liver, spleen, kidney and  
heart (in young birds from 4 weeks to 7 months of age)
•	 thickened, greyish nerves, with loss of cross-striation (up to 7 months of age).
147
Control
Marek’s disease cannot be cured. Vaccination of day-old chicks is possible  
but not practicable under village conditions. Selection for resistance to  
Marek’s disease in chickens is possible.
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases.
11.15 Pullorum disease (bacillary white diarrhoea)
Cause
Pullorum disease is caused by a bacterium called Salmonella pullorum.
transmission
The agent is shed in the droppings and can survive several months in the 
environment. It is destroyed quickly when exposed to direct sunlight.
The disease spreads:
•	 by direct contact between chicks (through the droppings)
•	 on the shoes or clothes of people, or on equipment
•	 from infected hens to their chicks via the egg 
•	 via surviving chicks, which may carry the virus for life. 
Species affected
Chickens, turkeys, quail and pheasant can be affected by pullorum disease. 
Only young chicks show clinical signs of the disease, from which they die in 
large numbers.
Clinical signs
Signs of pullorum disease are:
•	 chalk-white diarrhoea and a dirty vent
•	 weakness and closed eyes
•	 drooping wings.
Post-mortem findings
Post-mortem indicators of pullorum disease include:
•	 remnant egg yolk (persistent yolk sac) in the body cavity of young chicks
•	 small, whitish spots in the liver, heart and sometimes the lungs.
Control
Treatment with antibiotics is possible but the disease might reappear with the 
next group of chicks. It is therefore better to kill the infected mother hen to 
avoid further spread. 
Chapter 9 provides general information on prevention and control of  
infectious diseases.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
148 Part 3  diseases and their control
Public health
There are rare reports of enteritis in humans due to Salmonella pullorum 
infection. If an infected bird is eaten inadvertently, it is unlikely to cause  
a problem if the meat and/or eggs were well cooked. 
11.16 Internal parasites (worms)
A variety of worms may be found in the digestive system of chickens:
•	 Large white roundworms (ascarids) (5–11 cm long) live in the intestines 
(Figure 40).
•	 Small, fine hairworms (Capillaria species) (1.5–8 mm long) can be found 
throughout the intestinal tract.
•	 Caecal worms (Heterakis gallinarum) (1–1.5 cm long) are located only 
in the paired caeca.
Infective 
parasite  
egg
The development of the parasite egg 
takes place in the environment. Under 
optimal conditions (high temperature 
and high humidity) the eggs become 
infective in 10–20 days.
Figure 40.  The life cycle of Ascaridia galli is direct; that is, the parasite passes 
directly from one bird to another via ingestion of parasite eggs. Occasionally, 
earthworms can act as transport hosts. After infection, it usually takes  
40–60 days before the bird starts to pass parasite eggs in its droppings.
Eggs are 
passed with the 
droppings
Eggs may persist in 
the environment for 
several years.
The normal habitat of adult  
Ascaridia galli is the first part of 
the small intestine but with heavy 
infestations, they may spread to the 
whole intestines and the oviduct.
149
•	 Tapeworms, consisting of many small segments (proglottids)  
(7–10 mm long), live in the small intestine.
•	 Several types of roundworms of various sizes can be found in the crop, 
oesophagus, proventriculus or gizzard of chickens.
Other worms can be found in the trachea (Y -shaped, reddish gapeworms)  
or the eye of chickens.
transmission
Worm eggs are shed in the faeces. Warm, damp conditions allow the worm 
eggs to survive in the environment for a long time.
Some types of worms (tapeworms, flukes, Heterakis and some Capillaria 
species) pass through an intermediate host such as an insect, earthworm 
or snail, which then might be picked up by scavenging chickens. The eggs 
of other worms (ascarids, some Capillaria species) are directly picked up by 
other chickens in contaminated feed or water.
Clinical signs
Worms cause damage to the gut wall and take nutrients from the chicken  
they are infesting. Infestations are of greatest importance in young birds, 
resulting in:
•	 loss of appetite and weight
•	 diarrhoea.
Worms or segments of tapeworms can be found in the faeces.
Control
Infestation with worms can be controlled using a suitable anthelmintic. 
However, the use of drugs for deworming without improving housing 
conditions as described in Chapter 4 will provide only a temporary 
improvement. Birds will be re-infested by the intake of worm eggs from their 
environment. 
Reducing the numbers of worm eggs in the chickens’ environment is 
crucial for the control of worms. This can be achieved by:
•	 cleaning the chicken house and removing droppings every week
•	 cleaning feed and water containers daily
•	 avoiding development of wet and muddy areas around water containers or 
elsewhere.
Traditional remedies such as pawpaw seeds may be used by farmers in some 
areas to control internal parasites.
Chapter 11  Other infectious diseases of village chickens
150 Part 3  diseases and their control
12 Concluding remarks
Poultry have contributed to human health and wellbeing for thousands  
of years. Most people now live in urban areas and the commercial poultry 
industry has an important role to play in the provision of good-quality 
poultry and poultry products for these consumers. Nevertheless, village 
poultry continue to be an important part of livelihood strategies for millions 
of rural communities. Village poultry improvement programs developed 
in collaboration with producers and traders can improve not only the 
wellbeing of rural communities but also provide good-quality poultry to 
urban consumers who are willing to pay a price premium for birds raised 
under free-range, village conditions.
151
Bibliography 
Ahlers C. 2003. Analysis of training required by stakeholder groups within 
SANDCP in Mozambique and Tanzania. Australian Agency for 
International Development; Southern Africa Newcastle Disease 
Control Project: Maputo, Mozambique, 42 pp.
Alders R. 2004. Poultry for profit and pleasure. Diversification Booklet  
No. 3, Agricultural Support Systems Division. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations: Rome.
Alders R., Anjos F . dos, Bagnol B., Fringe R., Lobo Q., Mata B. and Young 
M. 2005. Case study A: learning about the control of Newcastle 
disease with village chicken farmers in Mozambique. Pp. 153–163 
in ‘Participatory livestock research: a guide’, ed. by C. Conroy. ITDG 
Publications: Rugby. 
Alders R., Anjos F . dos, Bagnol B., Fumo A., Mata B. and Young M. 2002. 
Controlling Newcastle disease in village chickens: a training manual, 
2nd ed. ACIAR Monograph No. 86, Canberra.
Alders R.G. and Bagnol B. 2007. Effective communication: the key to efficient 
HPAI prevention and control. World’s Poultry Science Journal  
63,139–147.
Alders R., Bagnol B., Harun M. and Young M. 2005. Village poultry, food 
security and HIV/AIDS mitigation. Paper presented at the FAO 
meeting on HIV/AIDS and livestock in Africa. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 
8–10 March 2005.
Alders R.G., Inoue S. and Katongo J.C. 1994. Prevalence and evaluation of 
Hitchner B1 and V4 vaccines for the control of Newcastle disease in 
village chickens in Zambia. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 21,125–132.
Alders R.G. and Pym R.A.E. 2008. Village poultry: still important to millions, 
eight thousand years after domestication. Paper number 299 in  
digital proceedings of the XXIII World’s Poultry Congress, Brisbane, 
30 June–4 July 2008.
Alders R.G. and Spradbrow P .B. 2001. Controlling Newcastle disease in village 
chickens: a field manual. ACIAR Monograph No. 82, Canberra.
Alders R.G. and Spradbrow P .B. (eds) 2001. SADC planning workshop on 
Newcastle disease control in village chickens. Proceedings of an 
international workshop, Maputo, Mozambique, 6–9 March 2000. 
ACIAR Proceedings No. 103, Canberra.
152 Part 3  diseases and their control
Alders R.G., Spradbrow P .B., Young M.P ., Mata B.V., Meers J., Lobo Q.J.P . and 
Copland J.W. 2001. Improving rural livelihoods through sustainable 
Newcastle disease control in village chickens. Pp. 199–205 in 
‘Proceedings of the 10th International Conference of the Association 
of Institutions for Tropical Veterinary Medicine, 20–23 August 2001, 
Copenhagen’. 
Alexander D.J., Bell J.G. and Alders, R.G. 2004. Technology review: Newcastle 
disease with special emphasis on its effect on village chickens. FAO 
Animal Production and Health Paper No. 161. FAO: Rome.
Bagnol B. 2001. The social impact of Newcastle disease control. In ‘SADC 
planning workshop on Newcastle disease control in village chickens, 
Maputo, 6–9 March 2000’. ACIAR Proceedings No. 103, 69–75. 
— 2005. Bicycles, boots, T -shirts and percentage over payment of vaccination: 
what role for community leaders? Paper presented at the international 
conference on ‘Opportunities for village chickens to assist with 
poverty alleviation with special emphasis on the sustainable control 
of Newcastle disease’, Dar es Salaam, 5–7 October 2005. [Published 
in the proceedings]
— 2005. Improving village chicken production by employing effective gender 
sensitive methodologies. Paper presented at the international 
conference on ‘Opportunities for village chickens to assist with 
poverty alleviation with special emphasis on the sustainable control 
of Newcastle disease’, Dar es Salaam, 5–7 October 2005. [Published 
in the proceedings]
— 2005. Communication about highly pathogenic avian influenza with special 
emphasis on village poultry farmers. Consultancy report. Mission 
from 26 December 2006 to 27 January 2007. Thailand – Indonesia 
– Lao People’s Democratic Republic. Emergency Centre for 
Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD), FAO Regional Office  
for Asia and the Pacific: Bangkok.
Blacksell S.D., Khounsy S., Phetsouvanh R. and Newton P .N. 2006. A simple 
and inexpensive container for the transport of biological specimens 
in limited resource situations. Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 100, 1084–1086.
Buza J.J. and Mwamuhehe H.A. 2001. Country report: Tanzania. In ‘SADC 
planning workshop on Newcastle disease in village chickens’, ed. by 
R.G. Alders and  P .B. Spradbrow. ACIAR Proceedings No. 103, 39–42.
Copland J.W. and Alders R.G. 2005. The Australian village poultry 
development programme in Asia and Africa. World’s Poultry Science 
Journal 61, 31–37.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 1994. A manual for 
the primary animal health care worker. FAO: Rome.
153bibliography
Harun M., Cambaza A., Alemão L., Maxhuza G., Joaquim M., Macanza G., 
Namaneque A., Lobo O. and Alders R. 2004. Community based 
experiences in controlling Newcastle disease in rural areas of 
Mozambique to achieve food security, poverty alleviation and HIV/
AIDS mitigation. Proceedings of the 5th Asia Pacific Poultry Health 
Conference, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, 21–22 April 2004.
James G.J. (ed.) 1985. Collection of material for laboratory examination, 7th 
ed. Department of Agriculture, New South Wales, Australia, Division 
of Animal Health. [ISBN 0 7240 6184 3]
Julian R. No date. Poultry husbandry. XXIII World Veterinary Congress 
Foundation: Montreal, Quebec.
Lobo Q., Alders R.G., Costa R., Dias P ., Fringe R., Mata B.V., Spradbrow P .B. 
and Young M.P . 2002. Lessons learnt about the control of Newcastle 
disease in village chickens in Mozambique using live thermostable  
I-2 ND vaccine. Pp. 491–492 in ‘Proceedings of the 7th WPSA  
Asian Pacific Federation Conference, Gold Coast, Australia,  
6–10 October 2002’.
Otto J., Pfeiffer D., Silbergeld E., Price L. and Tiensin T . 2006. Evidence-based 
policy for controlling HPAI in poultry: bio-security revisited. Pro-Poor 
Livestock Policy Initiative Research Report. FAO: Rome. At:  
<http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/projects/en/pplpi/hpai.html>.
Otto J., Pfeiffer D., Tiensin T ., Price L. and Silbergeld E. 2007. HPAI risk,  
bio-security and smallholder adversity. Pp. 1–8 in ‘Proceedings of the 
World’s Poultry Science Association Asian Pacific Federation Working 
Group on Small-Scale Family Poultry Farming Symposium, Bangkok, 
5–6 March 2007’.
Reid M., Pesti G. et al. No date. Raising healthy poultry under primitive 
conditions. Christian Veterinary Mission: Seattle, Washington.
Saif Y .M. (ed.)  2003. Diseases of poultry, 11th ed. Iowa State University Press: 
Ames; and Mosby-Wolfe: London.
SANDCP (Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project) 2005a. Essential 
information for extension workers for the control of Newcastle disease 
in village chickens. SANDCP: Animal Diseases Research Institute, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
— 2005b. Controlling Newcastle disease in village chickens—a training 
manual for trainers of community vaccinators. SANDCP: Animal 
Diseases Research Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Sonaiya E.B. 2003. Village poultry and its role in rural Africa. In ‘The potential 
of free ranging poultry development in improving the livelihoods 
and food security of rural households’, ed. by H.K. Swatson, I.V. 
Nsahlai, F . Dolberg, P .A. Iji and D. Umesiobi. Proceedings of the 
first international workshop on poultry development. Nature and 
Development Group of Africa: Pietermaritzburg.
154 Part 3  diseases and their control
WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) 2004. Animal husbandry/health and 
market-support interventions as alternatives to illegal wildlife use. 
WCS: Zambia; and the Animal Health for the Environment and 
Development (AHEAD) initiative, Washington, D.C.
Wethli E. 1995. Poultry development study, final report, family farming 
rehabilitation programme. Austral Consultoria e Projectos Lda: 
Maputo.
Woernle H. and Jodas S. 2001. Patient Tier. Geflügelkrankheiten 
(Taschenbuch). Ulmer: Eugen.
Woolcock R. 2003. The impact of Newcastle disease control on household 
welfare and the marketing of village poultry. Australian Agency 
for International Development Southern Africa Newcastle Disease 
Control Project: Maputo, Mozambique, 26 pp.
Woolcock R.F ., Harun M. and Alders R.G. 2004. The impact of Newcastle 
disease control in village chickens on the welfare of rural households 
in Mozambique. Paper presented at the Fourth Co-ordination 
Meeting of the FAO/IAEA Co-ordination Research Programme on the 
‘Assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against 
Newcastle disease and Gumboro disease using immunoassay-based 
technologies for increasing backyard poultry production in Africa’, 
Vienna, Austria, 24–28 May 2004.
Young M., Alders R., Spradbrow P ., Grimes S., Dias P ., da Silva A. and Lobo Q. 
2003. Controlling Newcastle disease in village chickens: a laboratory 
manual. ACIAR Monograph No. 87, Canberra.
155
Appendixes
The appendixes provide more detailed information on various 
topics relating to village chicken production.
156 Improving village chicken production: a manual for field workers and trainers
Appendix 1
How to use this manual as part of a training course for  
livestock officers, extension agents, community animal  
health workers or farmers
The information contained in this manual can be used to assist  
participatory training and extension activities with livestock officers,  
extension agents, community animal health workers and poultry farmers. 
Participatory technology development and farmer field-school approaches  
are particularly suitable for the application and trial of information and 
techniques described here. 
As noted in various sections of this manual, the constraints to local poultry 
production may include predation, inadequate nutrition, inefficient flock 
management and various diseases. The appendixes contain information that 
will assist with cost-efficient disease surveillance and the interpretation of 
serological results.
The participatory tools presented in Appendix 2 can be used to: 
•	 identify and prioritise local constraints to village poultry production 
(community animal health worker and farmer-oriented training) 
•	 identify and prioritise local constraints to disease surveillance, prevention 
and control (livestock officer and extension agent-oriented)
•	 identify available and affordable local resources to deal with the constraints 
•	 plan trials to assess the usefulness of different prevention and control 
options under local conditions
•	 design participatory monitoring and evaluation activities to enable the 
definition of indicators and methods of verification by participants, 
implementers and donors. 
157
Appendix 2
Participatory community exercises for identifying problems 
associated with village chicken production
Exercises
1. Awareness-raising activities and descriptions of the community 
and chicken production
 (a) Wellbeing stratification exercise
 (b) Community structures (Venn diagrams)
 (c) Family roles related to chicken raising
 (d) Ranking of activities according to their contribution  
 to household income 
 (e) Chicken-raising calendar
2.  Problem identification
 (a) Ranking of problems related to chicken raising
 (b) Focus group discussions
3.  Dreams realised or visioning
Exercises 1(a) and 1(b) will help to identify the characteristics of social  
groups within a community and how various community structures interact. 
Exercises 1(c), (d) and (e) are related to identifying the importance of chicken 
production and the roles and activities associated with raising chickens. 
These last three exercises could also be used again later, to help evaluate 
and identify the changes that have occurred as a result of new chicken-
management practices.
Exercises 2(a) and (b) can be used to identify problems associated with 
chicken production. They can also be used later, to help evaluate changes  
as a result of new chicken-management practices. 
The third exercise may help the community to identify and envision potential 
benefits of improved village chicken production.
1(a) Wellbeing stratification exercise
time required 
Approximately 1 hour
Purpose
To identify three different socioeconomic groups in the target population, 
representative of the well off, the less well off and the poor. This information can 
158
 Appendix 2
be used to identify households from each of the social groups. People from  
these different groups could be interviewed to determine the role that chickens 
play in their production system and to identify constraints to production within 
each of the groups. This process will help to ensure that extension activities are 
meeting the needs of a wide range of people within the community.
Materials
Flip chart and felt pen
Process
Organise a meeting of around 30–60 people of the village representative of  
the well off, the less well off and the poor, and men and women.
1. The facilitator introduces the team, the objective and the exercise.
2. The facilitator asks participants to describe the characteristics of three  
social groups in the community: well off, less well off and poor. The 
information is listed on the flip chart.
3. The discussion should flow from one issue to the other logically. The 
following guidelines list the types of questions that can be asked  
to guide the discussion.
Availability of food
Do all households eat the same number of meals?  Are there times of  
the year when some families do not have enough food?  How often do 
families eat meat?
Agricultural and livestock practices and assets
Do all households own land?  Do all households cultivate their own land?  
Do some households rent land?  Do all households own hand tools? What 
types of households own oxen, ox ploughs and ox carts?  What types of 
households own tractors?  How do different households cultivate land  
(hand tools, ox ploughing, tractor or hired labour)? What types of food 
crops do different households grow?  What types of livestock do different 
households own?  Do all households own livestock?  Do all households  
use agricultural inputs such as veterinary medicines and chemicals  
(vaccines, antibiotics, fertilisers, insecticides, herbicides, fungicides etc.)?
Household income
What are the major sources of income? What types of crops are grown?  
What types of livestock are raised? How important are chickens as a source of 
income? What are other sources of on-farm income (e.g. beer brewing)? Are 
there sources of off-farm income (e.g. school teacher, working on other farms)?  
How important is on-farm and off-farm income in different households?
Household assets
What different types of houses are there?  How many households have 
thatched roofs or tin roofs?  How many households live in mud and wattle 
159Participatory community exercises
houses, or houses made of mud bricks or concrete blocks?  Do all houses 
have a latrine?  Do all households use mosquito nets?  What are the main 
items of furniture owned in different households?  What are the main 
kitchen utensils used in each house?
Social characteristics
What different types of households are there? Are there, for example, 
households that are primarily female or without adult male members; 
households with only old people; households with sick and physically 
infirm people; households with only children; households with young 
families; extended polygamous households; extended monogamous 
households? How many households pay local fees and levies? 
4. The facilitator should either interpret the ideas coming from the  
participants to describe the characteristics of each social group or, 
alternatively, the characteristics should first be listed randomly and  
the second step would be to organise these different characteristics  
into the categories of well off, less well off and poor in a second stage  
of discussion.
5. If the facilitator wishes to work with families in each of these categories it 
is a good idea not to name the groups as ‘rich or well off’ or ‘poor’ etc., 
as this can be embarrassing or demeaning for participants. It is better to 
identify a main characteristic of each group, such as the number of cattle 
owned or the area of land farmed and categorise families accordingly. 
1(b) Describing community structures (Venn diagrams) 
time required
Approximately 1 hour
Purpose
To help the community and the facilitators understand the organisational 
structures that exist within the community and how they relate to each other. 
This may help to determine the best ways to work with the community and to 
avoid conflicts between existing groups.
Materials
Flip chart and pen; scissors; tape or glue
This activity can be carried out with village leaders and also with same-sex 
meetings of 20 men and 20 women of different social groups. The meetings 
can be held on different days. 
Process
•	 Using a sheet of paper from a flip chart, ask the participants to list all of the 
groups and structures (formal and informal; official and unofficial) within 
their village.
160
•	 Using a new sheet of paper, draw a circle for each group/structure in 
the list and write the name of that group/structure in the circle. The more 
important the group, the larger should be the circle.
•	 Cut out each circle.
•	 Arrange the circles on a fresh sheet of paper to illustrate the overall system 
and to show relationships between the different parts. Circles can overlap, 
be far apart, close together, or within other circles etc.
•	 Display and explain the system developed to the other groups so that 
differences can be discussed. Analyse key differences between the groups 
and the underlying causes. 
Notes
This can be a very illuminating exercise for the community, as certain aspects 
of their village life and organisation may be explicitly revealed for the first 
time. It will also show the different perceptions of different groups. It may help 
to highlight different roles, responsibilities and linkages, pointing to areas of 
conflict and dispute as well as to ways of resolving them.
Different groups may produce completely different diagrams. These can then 
be discussed to help resolve conflicts and encourage linkages. However, it 
may not be possible to pull all of these systems together into something that 
represents them all. Diversity needs to be accepted.
1(c) Identifying family roles relating to chicken raising 
time required 
Approximately 1 hour
Purpose
•	 To understand the roles of different family members so that meetings and 
training can be conducted with the appropriate family member(s).
Materials
Flip chart and felt pen
Process
•	 Draw the following table (Table A1.1) on a flip chart and leave space at the 
bottom for adding extra tasks. 
•	 Either in one large group or in groups divided into men and women, 
discuss the tasks listed in the table and ask participants to add or remove 
tasks according to what is normally done to look after village chickens.
•	 Ask participants to identify who performs the different activities related to 
chicken raising and to fill in the table. 
•	 Discuss the main findings and assess who should be most involved in 
training or activities related to chicken raising to ensure that the person 
involved with the activity is adequately informed and is in charge of it.
Appendix 2
161
Table A2.1  Family activities related to chicken raising
Activities Adult 
men
Adult 
women
boys Girls Older 
men
Older 
women
Large species of livestock
Small species of livestock
Chicken raising
Who gives feed?
Who gives water?
Who built the chicken house?
Who prepared the place for  
the hen to hatch?
Who cleans the house?
Who receives information on  
chicken raising?
Who owns the birds?
Who decides when to sell birds?
Who decides when to sell eggs?
Who decides whether to vaccinate?
Who decides on need for and level of 
supplementary feed?
Who opens and closes the chicken  
house door?
Who collects the eggs?
Who slaughters birds and prepares them 
for consumption?
Who can eat birds?
Who can eat eggs?
Who decides when to eat birds or eggs?
Who takes care of sick birds?
Who decides if vaccination was 
successful?
Participatory community exercises
162
1(d)  Ranking of activities according to their contribution  
 to household income 
time required
Approximately 30 minutes 
Purpose
•	 To identify how important chicken raising is in different households  
in comparison to other enterprises 
•	 To understand the reasons for the relative importance of chicken raising 
•	 To measure the change in importance attached to chicken raising as 
improved management techniques are introduced 
Materials
Flip chart and pens; A4-size paper; drawings; stones or beans
Process
•	 Organise two meetings, one with 20 men, the other with 20 women,  
the participants in each case being drawn from a range of social groups. 
The meetings can be held on the same or different days.
•	 Each group should be divided into the three social categories 
(remembering not to ask people to divide according to categories such  
as ‘rich’ or ‘poor’, but rather according to less sensitive descriptions such 
as those who own many cattle, a few cattle or no cattle.
•	 Conduct one of the following two exercises with each group:
1. Simple ranking
(a) The facilitator introduces the team and explains that the objective is to 
identify the importance of chicken raising relative to other household 
activities. The facilitator explains that everybody should contribute with 
their ideas. (Register the total number of participants in the group.)
(b) Identify the major crops, animal enterprises and other activities in the 
participants’ livelihood strategies. 
(c) Either use existing drawings or draw the animals, crops and activities  
on cards.
(d) Distribute the same number of stones or beans to each of the participants. 
Ask each of the participants to put a number of stones on the drawing 
according to their importance in their household livelihood. Ask each 
participant to justify their ranking. (Verify that each participant uses all the 
stones distributed.)
(e) At the end of the exercise, count the stones on each of the activities. 
Calculate the contribution of each activity as a percentage of the total. 
(Divide the number of stones in each drawing by the total number of 
stones distributed and multiply by 100.)
Appendix 2
163
(f) Discuss with the participants the result obtained. Verify that it 
corresponds to their perception of the reality. Discuss its implications 
for the project.
2. Preference ranking
Preference ranking is a variation of simple ranking and can be used as an 
alternative to it. It involves the participants assessing the relative importance of 
different farm enterprises using criteria they themselves identify. The ranking 
can be undertaken using a matrix with farm enterprises on the horizontal axis 
and the selected criteria on the vertical axis. An example is given in Table A2.2.
The advantage of preference ranking over simple ranking is that the 
participants select the criteria for ranking and so it is easier to understand the 
reasons for the ranking. The disadvantage is that it is more difficult to facilitate.
The following steps are involved in farm enterprise preference ranking:
(a) The facilitator introduces the team and explains that the objective is to 
identify the importance of chicken raising relative to other household 
activities. The facilitator explains that everybody should contribute their 
ideas. (Register the total number of participants in the group.)
(b) Ask participants to identify the six most common farm enterprises. Ensure 
that chicken raising is included in the list.
(c) Ask participants to select criteria for ranking the importance of each 
enterprise by asking the following questions:  ‘What is good about this 
enterprise?’  ‘What else?’ (Continue until there are no more replies.) Then 
ask: ‘What is bad about this enterprise?’  ‘What else?’ (Continue until there 
are no more replies.)
(d) List all the criteria.
(e) Turn negative attributes into positive ones (e.g. ‘prone to disease’ becomes 
‘disease resistant’; ‘a lot of work’ becomes ‘little work’)
(f) Help participants to draw up a matrix with criteria listed down the side of 
the matrix and enterprises along the top. (Where possible, use symbols 
for the row and column titles—either prepared before or prepared at the 
meeting.)
(g) Using a five-point scoring system in which five points is the highest and 
best score, in a group exercise rank each of the enterprises for each  
of the criteria. 
(h) When the exercise is completed, cross-check the ranking of each 
enterprise, by asking a question to confirm its ranking (e.g. ‘It seems that 
chicken enterprises are/are not very important for household income. Is 
this correct?’).
(i) Follow up the ranking results by a discussion to explore different viewpoints. 
(j) This exercise will require two facilitators; one to assist the participants  
in the exercise and the other to record the discussions.
Participatory community exercises
164
Table A2.2 gives an example of how a preference ranking matrix for the above 
exercise might look. (The values shown are examples only.)
Table A2.2  An example of a preference ranking matrix
Chickens Goats Cashew Maize beans Cassava
Profitable 1 2 4 3 4 3
disease free 1 1 1 3 3 4
Easy to sell 4 4 4 3 4 2
low labour needs 5 4 3 2 2 3
Available when food for 
the family is in short 
supply
4 5 1 1 1 4
total 15 16 13 12 14 16
This table indicates that cashew and maize may be less important than the 
other four activities.
1(e)  Chicken-raising calendar
time required
Approximately 2 hours
Purpose
To identify when the main activities relating to chicken raising occur 
throughout a year. To provide a structure to allow an exploration of important 
issues relating to chicken husbandry practices; chicken and egg consumption 
and marketing; knowledge of, attitudes to and responses to Newcastle 
disease (and/or other important poultry production constraints); and 
community ideas for improving any existing ND control activities. The data 
collected will complement the data collected in the baseline survey.
Frequency
To be undertaken in the initial participatory rural appraisal (PRA) and  
annually thereafter. 
Materials
Flip chart and pens; drawings of different activities (the participants can also 
draw these); glue; notebook
Process
Two facilitators are required, one to lead the discussion, the other to take notes.
Organise meetings of same-sex residents, with around 20 people in each 
group. The meetings can be held one after the other or on different days.
Appendix 2
165
1. A facilitator introduces the team and explains the objective of the exercise: 
to discuss chicken-raising activities.
2. When an activity occurs at a specific time of the year, it is put on the 
calendar. Other information is collected in a notebook. 
3. Residents draw an annual calendar divided into 12 monthly columns on 
the flip chart. The facilitator should assist if required. 
4. The discussion should flow logically from one issue to the other.  
Examples follow of the types of questions that can be asked to guide  
the discussion:
Chicken ownership
•	 Does everybody own or look after chickens? Who does not have any and 
why? How many chickens does each person own or look after?  What 
is the normal (average) number of chickens owned or looked after by a 
household? 
•	 In which months do people have more chickens? Why? Is it during harvest 
period? When do they have less? Is it at the end of the hungry period? 
(Mark on the calendar (see Table A1.3) the month when households have 
most chickens and when they have the least chickens.)
•	 Who owns the chickens in the household? Who takes care of them?
Chicken husbandry practices
•	 What do chickens eat? 
•	 Where do chickens sleep at night? How secure is the chicken house?
•	 What are the main problems with chicken raising? Diseases, names of the 
diseases, explanation of the origin and transmission of the diseases, other 
problems? (Record the information about diseases in the notebook and 
mark the appropriate months on the calendar.)
Newcastle disease
•	 When do ND outbreaks usually occur? When are the peaks of the 
disease? (Record the information about ND in the notebook and mark the 
appropriate month(s) on the calendar.)
•	 How do you recognise ND (what are its characteristics)? What prevention 
and treatment methods do you use? Who gives the treatment? (Record the 
information about when treatment is normally given in the notebook and 
mark the appropriate month(s) on the calendar.)
•	 Repeat for other significant diseases in the area.
Agricultural calendar
•	 Which months are the rainy seasons? In which months are the main 
agricultural activities undertaken? (Record the information in the notebook 
and mark on the calendar the months in which the various activities  
normally occur.)
Participatory community exercises
166
Consumption of chicken products
•	 When do people usually eat more chickens and eggs? Why? Is it during 
feasts or before a ND outbreak? (Record the information in the notebook 
and mark the relevant months on the calendar.)
•	 Who usually eats the different parts of the chicken? Why? Who eats 
most of the chicken? At what age can a child start eating eggs or 
chicken? Why? Do pregnant women eat eggs and chicken? Why or why 
not? (Record the information in the notebook.)
Chicken and egg sales
•	 What is the price of a chicken and of an egg in the different periods of 
the year? Are they (birds and eggs) sold by piece or by weight? When  
is the price lower and when is it higher? Why? (Record the information  
in the notebook and mark the relevant months on the calendar.)
•	 Where do people usually sell chickens and eggs? Why? Is the price  
the same in the different locations? (If there is a seasonal variation, 
record the information in the notebook and mark the relevant months  
on the calendar.)
•	 Who sells eggs and chickens (men, women, children)? What do they 
do with the money? Who controls the money from the sale of chickens? 
(Record the information in the notebook.) 
•	 Who makes the decision to eat or sell? (If there is a seasonal variation, 
record the information in the notebook and mark the relevant months on 
the calendar.)
Newcastle disease vaccination
•	 Have you heard about ND vaccination? With what type of vaccine: La 
Sota, I-2, some other type? What is it? Who stores or looks after the 
vaccine? Who organises the vaccination? Is a campaign or ongoing 
vaccination approach used? Is ND vaccine available in the village? (If 
there are campaigns against ND, record the information in the notebook 
and mark the relevant months on the calendar.)
•	 How effective was the vaccination? Did all the chickens that were 
vaccinated survive the ND outbreak?  Was there any difference in deaths 
from ND between vaccinated and non-vaccinated birds? How do you 
think the vaccination process can be improved? (If the timing of existing 
vaccinations should be altered, record the information in the notebook 
and mark the recommended time on the calendar.)
Appendix 2
167
Table A2.3  An example of a chicken-raising calendar summarising data gathered in 2003 
before vaccination with Newcastle disease vaccine began in Mtwara region, 
Tanzania
Issues J F M A M J J A S O N d
More chicken die of lice x x x
ND outbreak x x x x
Rain x x x x x x
Weeding x x
Land preparation x x
Harvest x x x x x
Few chickens x x x x x x x x
Hunger period x x x x x x x x
Many chickens x x x
More chickens are eaten x x x x x
High price for chickens x x x x x
Low price for chickens x x x x x x
2(a)  Ranking of problems related to chicken-raising
time required
Approximately 30 minutes
Purpose
To rank the relative importance of the different problems facing chicken raisers 
over the life of the project.
Frequency
To be undertaken in these participatory community exercises and annually 
thereafter. 
Materials
Flip chart and pen; drawings; stones or beans
Process
This activity can be carried out with separate meetings of up to 20 men and 20 
women, participants in each case being drawn from the three different social 
groups. The meetings can be held on different days. The activity should be 
conducted annually. 
1. The facilitator presents the team and explains that the objective of the exercise 
is to discuss the problems related to chicken raising and to rank them 
according to their importance. Everybody is asked to contribute their ideas. 
(Write down the total number of participants.)
Participatory community exercises
168
2. Discuss what are the main problems with chicken raising.
3. Use existing drawings or ask the participants to draw the different activities.
4. Distribute the same number of stones or beans to each of the participants. 
Ask each of the participants to put a number of stones on the drawing 
according to their importance. Ask each participant to justify their ranking. 
(Verify that each participant uses all the stones distributed.) 
5. At the end of the exercises, count the stones on each of the cards/
drawings. Calculate the percentage of stones placed on each card/
drawing by dividing the number of stones in each drawing with the  
total number of stones distributed and multiplying by 100 (Table A2.4). 
Convert the percentages to a ranking, with 1 being the highest  
ranking (highest percentage) and record the rankings on the flip  
chart (Table A2.4).
6. Discuss with the participants the results obtained. Verify if it corresponds  
to their perception of reality. Discuss its implications for the project.
Note: This exercise could also be undertaken using pair-wise ranking  
 where each problem is compared in importance to every  
 other problem.
Table A2.4  An example of problem ranking by men and women in 2003 and 2005 
in Dodoma region, Tanzania. Vaccination against Newcastle disease  
began in 2003.
Issue 2003 2003 2005 2005
Men women Non vaccinating vaccinating
Newcastle disease 1 1 1
Predation/theft 2 9
Coughing 6 5
Housing 5 2 4
External parasites 3 3 2
Fowl pox 8 4
Diarrhoea 7 7
Feed 8 7
Marketing 3 –
Swollen liver 6 3
Swollen eyes/head 2 1
Death of chicks 3
Worms 4
Infectious coryza 4
Appendix 2
169
2(b)  Focus group discussions
time required
Approximately 1–2 hours
Introduction
Focus group discussions (FGDs) are one of the main tools to be used to collect 
data about the implementation and effectiveness of vaccination campaigns.
Focus group discussions are facilitated discussions held with small groups that 
have either homogeneous or heterogeneous views. Group size should be kept 
to between 8 and 12 persons. The discussions usually last 1–2 hours and have 
many potential uses, including: 
•	 to serve as a forum for addressing a particular issue to highlight various 
concerns, conflicting interests and common ground among different groups
•	 to provide an opportunity to cross-check information collected using other 
techniques
•	 to obtain a variety of reactions to hypothetical, planned or actual 
interventions.
The skill of the facilitator is an important element in the success or failure of 
FGDs. The person who guides the focus group uses group-process skills to 
ensure that all the participants can speak openly and to direct the discussion to 
the relevant topic. 
The most useful outputs of these discussions are in the form of qualitative 
insights and direct quotations illustrating the views of the group’s members. 
Focus group discussions will be used on the project to empower communities 
and to collect information for strategic planning and impact assessment. 
The next sections outline the overall approach and tips for facilitators on how to 
prepare for and conduct FGDs. 
Focus group discussions can also be used to collect information about gender, 
poverty alleviation, the extent of community participation and many other areas. 
Purpose
Focus group discussions provide forums at which community members can 
discuss the performance, effectiveness and impact of vaccination campaigns, 
and make recommendations for improvements. The results of the discussions 
should be communicated to vaccinators, supervisors and national coordinators 
and other service-delivery agencies so that planning, implementation, 
monitoring and effectiveness can be improved. 
Frequency and timing
Focus group discussions should be held at the end of every vaccination 
campaign in all pilot villages where vaccination campaigns are conducted.
Participatory community exercises
170
Participants
Focus groups comprising between 8 and 12 people should be formed. A 
person trained by the project will facilitate each group. Two groups will be 
formed in every project village, one comprising men the other women. The 
groups should be representative of the three wealth categories in each village, 
and of vaccinating and non-vaccinating farmers.
topics for discussion
The main topics of discussion will be: How effective was the last vaccination 
campaign? How can implementation be improved? What benefits have been 
created as a result of the vaccination campaigns? Who are the beneficiaries? 
The project will provide facilitators with general checklists of topics to be 
covered for each campaign; see example in the box below.
length of group discussions
Discussions should last 1–2 hours. 
Recording of the discussions
The facilitator should keep a record of the discussion and they should leave a 
copy with the community. If possible, somebody should assist the facilitator to 
record the discussions.
Reporting of focus group discussions
The facilitator should report on the FGDs to district-level personnel who 
should, in turn, report to regional authorities. 
Tips on how to prepare and conduct focus group discussions:
•	 Have a clear purpose for the group discussion, based on the general 
project checklist.
First Newcastle disease vaccination campaign, checklist  
of subtopics
•	 Timing of the vaccination campaign 
•	 Methods used in the campaign
•	 How can campaigns be improved?
•	 Numbers of chickens vaccinated
•	 Numbers of farmers vaccinating chickens
•	 Reasons why some farmers vaccinated and others did  
not vaccinate
•	 Knowledge about vaccinations among group members
•	 Attitude to vaccinations among group members
Appendix 2
171
•	 Prepare a checklist of issues to be covered in the discussion, based on 
the general checklist prepared by the project. Prepare prompts that can be 
used to open up areas that need to be discussed. 
•	 With the help of local leaders and key informants (including the vaccinator 
and supervisor), identify participants. Ensure all required subgroups are 
represented.
•	 Advise people well in advance when the discussions will be held.
•	 Ensure there is a comfortable and pleasant atmosphere. Arrange snacks 
and drinks.
•	 Start the discussion with enough authority to keep the discussion on track, 
but with sufficient sensitivity to include everybody in the discussions. It is 
a good tactic to say that you are not an expert on the issues that are being 
discussed and that you want the participants to help you understand the 
issues better.
•	 Try to identify which issues are of general concern to the group and which 
issues are more controversial or personal in nature.
•	 When important issues have been agreed by the group, ensure that you 
fully understand them. A good way to make sure you understand is to 
paraphrase what they have agreed and ask them if you have understood 
properly.
•	 Look for potential spokespersons from different focus groups who could 
be asked to meet together to summarise the concerns of their groups and 
discuss differences between the groups.
•	 The facilitator would identify prompts and questions for each of the 
subtopics to assist spokespersons to facilitate the discussion.
3  Dreams realised or visioning
time required 
Approximately 1 hour
Purpose
To identify how participating stakeholders expect the project will benefit them, 
and what other changes they expect from the project over a longer time 
scale; e.g. 10 years. To identify indicators and to discuss how to measure the 
benefits and changes expected. 
Process
The following method could be used.
•	 In one large group, start by asking participants how they would like things 
to be as a result of improved chicken production in the future. Ask the 
participants to reflect individually on the following question: How would 
you describe the ideal situation we wish to achieve here in 10 year’s time 
as a result of improved chicken production? (10 minutes)
Participatory community exercises
172
•	 Divide into subgroups (by gender if appropriate) and write down on cards 
or create symbols for the visions. (15 minutes)
•	 Meet in the large group to discuss the visions, to identify how best the 
community can assess the progress being made in achieving the visions 
and to agree on how the community will keep track of the changes.  
(30 minutes)
•	 The development of the dreams/indicators needs to be properly recorded 
so that a time series of information is stored. It is important to compare the 
current dreams with those identified previously, to discuss why changes 
have occurred and to what extent changes have been caused by project 
activities or external factors. 
Appendix 2
173
Appendix 3
Collection of blood samples
The examination of serum can reveal previous contact of the sampled bird with 
a particular infectious agent (ND virus, for example) and provide information 
about the success of vaccination. It takes some time (generally about 2 weeks) 
after vaccination or contact with an infectious agent before antibodies to the 
agent are found in the blood.
Further information on serology is given in Section 5 of Appendix 5.
Blood samples can be collected from the wing vein of chickens. It is possible 
to pierce a wing vein with a needle and collect the freely flowing blood into 
a small container. This delivers a sample that will probably be contaminated 
with bacteria and is less satisfactory than a sample collected using a syringe 
and needle. Also, the chicken is likely to be discoloured with blood, and some 
owners will object to this. The technique described below is less likely to stain 
the chicken with its blood and yields a better-quality blood sample. It based 
on the technique used by Dr Janeen Samuel (Australia) and Dr Rini Dharsana 
(Indonesia). 
Materials needed 
This technique uses a needle and syringe, both of which can be washed for 
reuse, though the needle less often than the syringe:
•	 a 25 G (0.50 
× 16 mm) needle is used for chicks under 4 weeks of age
•	 a 23 G (0.65 × 32 mm) needle for older chickens.
Plastic syringes of 1.0 or 2.5 mL capacity are convenient.
If you have an assistant:
1. Ask the assistant to hold the chicken horizontally against their body with its 
head to their right.
2. Pull the right wing out towards you, pluck away the small feathers from the 
underside of the wing overlying the humerus, if necessary, and swab with 
70% alcohol. The wing vein, named in various textbooks as the brachial, 
ulnar or cutaneous ulnar vein, is clearly visible running between the biceps 
and triceps muscles.
If working alone:
1. Sit with the chicken held horizontally between your thighs, head away from 
you, lying half on its back and half turned on its right side. (Some people 
prefer to hold the bird with its head towards them.)
2. Clamp down its legs with your left elbow (if you are right-handed) and its 
neck with your left forearm, and with your left hand spread out its left wing.
174
3. Insert the needle under the tendon of the pronator muscle, in the triangle 
formed where the wing vein bifurcates (see Figure A3.1), pointing the 
needle in the direction of the blood flow. Do not insert the needle too deep 
or it will scrape the humerus and the chicken will struggle. Also, avoid the 
ulnar nerve. With a little gentle probing you should enter the vein easily.
(This approach from under the tendon makes it easier to enter the vein 
than does aiming directly for it, and also tends to steady the needle if the 
bird moves.)
4. Use only gentle suction to withdraw blood since the veins on chickens 
collapse readily. Collect 1–2 mL blood per chicken.
5. After the needle is removed, apply pressure to the vein for a few seconds 
to discourage further bleeding.  Immediately cap the needle to prevent 
needle-stick injuries.
6. Immediately label the syringe with the number of the chicken.
7. If the blood is for serum collection, leave it in the syringe and store the 
syringe in a slanting position, with the capped needle end pointing 
upwards. Leave an air space between the blood and the needle end of the 
syringe. If possible, leave the syringes in a warm room at 37 °C for 1 hour 
to assist coagulation.
8. Ensure that all sharp items (e.g. needles) and contaminated items are 
disposed of in a safe manner.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A3.1  Illustration of a convenient anatomical site for bleeding chickens (adapted 
from J. Samuel, Virology Laboratory, University of Queensland)
Biceps muscle
Triceps muscle
Brachial vein
Tendon of pronator muscle
Tendon of flexor 
carpi ulnaris 
muscle
Needle and syringe
Epicondyl of 
humerus
Biceps artery
Ulner nerve
Appendix 3
175
Appendix 4
Post-mortem examination
A4.1 General information
When conducting a post-mortem, always wear appropriate protective 
clothing—gloves, waterproof apron, rubber boots and coveralls (overalls).  
If you suspect that the bird may have died of a zoonotic disease, a face  
mask (type N95) and goggles should be worn. 
Clinical signs of sick chickens are often general (e.g. weakness, drooping 
wings, inappetence), or similar for several diseases (e.g. diarrhoea, respiratory 
distress). A post-mortem (‘after death’) examination reveals the organs 
affected by the disease and may also show characteristic lesions. Thus, 
post-mortem examination of a bird that died or has been killed after being 
sick strengthens and verifies a diagnosis based on case history and clinical 
examination. In this way, diagnosis of poultry diseases at field level can be 
enhanced with only limited financial input.
In general, post-mortem examinations are best performed in diagnostic 
laboratories. However, conditions in the field (long distances and lack of 
transport and cooling facilities) often make it impossible to send birds to the 
laboratory. Therefore, an extension officer should be able to confirm their 
diagnosis by performing a post-mortem in the field. 
Note: 
If there is a possibility that the bird to be examined has been  
infected with a zoonotic disease such as HPAI, it is essential that  
the technician use personal protective equipment (including gloves, 
a fitted N95 mask, safety goggles and coveralls).
Requirements for post-mortems performed under field conditions:
•	 Materials needed 
 – a tray or a thick layer of clean paper (to perform the post-mortem on)
 – a sharp knife (to cut the muscles and skin). A stainless steel knife with 
a plastic handle is best. Ensure that it can be cleaned easily. 
 – a pair of scissors (to cut muscles and skin and to open the intestines). 
Curved surgical (Mayo) scissors with both points rounded are best.
 – a pair of shears or garden secateurs (to cut the bones). A cheap, heavy 
pair of ordinary kitchen-type scissors is useful for cutting bones. If at least 
one blade is sharp-pointed, these scissors can be used for exposing the 
brain. For larger birds, ordinary garden pruning shears are ideal.
176
 – a pair of forceps (rat-toothed are best; to hold any part of the carcass). 
If ordinary non-toothed forceps are used to handle organs and tissues, 
excessive handling and squeezing may damage the tissues. If fingers 
are used, the dissection field may become smeared with blood, 
which obscures detail. Fingers also tend to cause more bacterial 
contamination of exposed surfaces.
These materials should be washed and disinfected after each  
post-mortem. If disinfectant is not available, boiling water may  
be used instead.
If samples are to be sent to a laboratory for further diagnosis:
 – bottles containing 50% glycerine in saline
 – bottles containing 10% formalin (The volume of 10% formalin used 
should be at least 10 times that of the tissue to be fixed.)
 – a cool box with ice or ice-packs (if possible).
Glycerine in saline is used to preserve samples for virus isolation. 
Formalin is used to preserve and fix samples for histological 
examination.
•	 where to perform the post-mortem
The post-mortem should be performed in dry, clean surroundings with  
as little dust and wind as possible.
It should be performed on an even surface that:
 – is big enough to spread out the carcass and the organs (40 cm × 30 cm)
 – can be cleaned properly afterwards or will be discarded
 – does not allow the ground to be contaminated with any liquid (blood, 
faeces, intestinal content) or small parts from the carcass. (Sick 
chickens may carry and spread infectious agents.)
•	 Selection of birds
When selecting birds for post-mortem, it is best to choose live birds  
that are showing typical signs, rather than dead birds or those that  
have been sick for some time. In dead or chronically ill birds, the  
primary disease may be obscured by secondary diseases or by  
post-mortem decomposition. 
If you are investigating a flock problem, then it is important to examine 
more than one sick bird at necropsy. For example, if three birds were 
examined, the accuracy of the subsequent diagnosis would be several 
times more likely to be accurate. 
•	 disposal of the carcass
After doing a post-mortem the remaining carcass and all parts of the  
bird (including the feathers) should be buried or burnt to avoid further 
spread of infectious agents.
Appendix 4
177
A4.2  Humane slaughter of birds
It is important to kill birds in a humane, efficient manner that does not itself  
cause changes that might confuse the diagnosis. Three techniques are  
described in this section. The first, cervical dislocation, is the most practicable 
under village conditions. Note that each of the techniques prevents the 
contamination of the environment with blood during the slaughtering process.
Examine the bird for clinical abnormalities before it is killed. This may  
indicate a particular system or organ that needs special attention during  
the post-mortem examination.
Cervical dislocation
1. Grasp the legs and primary wing feathers with one hand, so the bird  
cannot flutter.
2. With the other hand, grasp the bird’s head from above, holding the head between 
the first (index) and second fingers. Curve the fingers along the bottom of the jaw. 
This avoids pressure on the larynx and tongue when the neck is broken.
3. Hold the bird across your body, with its head downwards. No undue force  
is used at any time up to this point. Bend the bird’s head backwards.
4. Break the bird’s neck using a fairly strong, rapid stretching action, keeping  
the head bent backwards. The bird will lose consciousness immediately,  
but will make strong reflex movements for about 2 minutes after neck 
dislocation. While struggling continues, keep the bird immobilised by 
maintaining your grip on the wing bases. Elevate the head to lessen the 
likelihood of inhalation of crop content, which may be regurgitated.
Intravenous injection of air
1. Grasp the bird by the wing bases with the left hand and immobilise it over  
the edge of a table.
2. Pluck a few feathers over the brachial vein.
3. Compress the base of the wing with the left index finger to distend the  
brachial vein.
4. Place the needle into the vein and rapidly inject 6–7 mL of air. Reflex  
struggling is brief and there is no trauma to neck structures. The bird does  
not regurgitate, as it may after cervical dislocation. Again, the wing bases  
should be held firmly until struggling stops.
burdizzo
The burdizzo, a pinching tool used in the castration of cattle, can also be used  
to break the necks of poultry.
1. Two people must work together to use this technique.
2. One person holds the bird by the legs and primary wing feathers.
3. The second person places the burdizzo over the neck of the bird and  
closes them quickly to crush the vertebrae.
Post-mortem examination
178
A4.3 Post-mortem technique for domestic fowl
There are many protocols for doing a necropsy on a bird. One protocol is 
described here. Whatever protocol you choose to follow, it should be one that 
is thorough and systematic, and that you feel comfortable with. 
work safely and cleanly
Ensure that water and soap are available for hand washing.
Collect cloacal and tracheal swabs before you begin the necropsy. 
To avoid unnecessary contamination, collect samples for laboratory 
diagnosis DURING the post-mortem, not afterwards. 
Examination procedure
A good necropsy involves careful external and internal examination of the 
carcass.
1. Examine the whole body, vent, breast muscle, skin, feathers, comb and 
wattles, nostrils, eyes and beak.
2. Spray or dip the carcass in a dilute solution of detergent or disinfectant to 
wet the feathers and reduce the risk of aerosolising infectious particles.
3. Position the carcass on its back with the legs towards you. Strip the skin 
from the breast, neck and legs and dislocate the hip joints by bending both 
legs outwards so that the carcass lies flat.
4. Open the abdomen and chest cavity. Avoid damaging any structures 
inside the carcass.
5. Examine the position and general appearance of the organs. 
This is the ‘display stage’ of the necropsy and is critically important. It is 
the last time you will be able to observe the organs in situ in an undisturbed, 
uncontaminated state. Any abnormal proportions, positions and configurations 
of organs must be noted at this time. Any accumulations of fluid or fibrin are 
noted now, as is the overall state of nutrition, presence or absence of overall 
carcass discolouration etc. Most of these features will be lost or hidden once 
the necropsy proceeds.
6. Examine the air sacs, heart and pericardial sac. Remove the heart and cut 
it open.
7. Pull the proventriculus, gizzard and small intestine to your left. Examine the 
abdominal cavity.
8. Cut the oesophagus at the junction with the proventriculus and free the 
gizzard and liver from their attachments. Cut the colon just before it enters 
the cloaca. Gently lift the intestines and cut their connection to the 
gastrointestinal tract close to the gut. Take the whole bowel (proventriculus, 
gizzard and intestines with liver and spleen) out to the left.
Appendix 4
179
9. Cut the spleen from the bowel and inspect the spleen.
10. Cut the liver from the bowel. Inspect the liver and note the size of the 
gall bladder.
11. Examine the testes in roosters, and the ovary, oviduct and uterus in hens.
12. Loosen the lungs from the ribs and roof of the thorax and examine them.
13. Remove the ovary and remains of the air sacs to reveal the kidneys. 
Note their size, shape and colour. Check the small tubes connecting the 
kidneys with the cloaca (ureters). 
14. Examine the nerves—the sciatic nerve plexus, the sciatic nerve, the 
intercostal nerves (between the ribs), the brachial plexus and the spinal 
and vagus nerves in the neck.
15. In young birds, open the bursa of Fabricius through its opening to the 
cloaca and examine.
16. Examine the leg joints and open them.
17. Cut off the tip of the beak just above the nostrils with shears to open the 
nasal cavities and sinuses. Open and examine them for changes.
18. Open the beak, larynx and trachea. Spread the trachea and examine it for 
liquid or other content and changes in colour.
19. Starting at the oesophagus, open the entire intestinal tract (crop, gizzard, 
proventriculus, intestine including the caecum).
20. Remove the head and gently open the cranium. 
Finishing up
Carcass disposal
Dispose of the carcass immediately after finishing the necropsy. Proper 
carcass disposal will prevent the spread of the disease agent to other  
animals or humans through environmental contamination. 
Guidelines for effective carcass disposal are given in Chapter 9.
Cleaning up 
All objects that have come in contact with potentially infectious materials 
should be cleaned and decontaminated immediately after the necropsy.  
This will prevent the spread of the disease agent to other animals or humans. 
Sterilise instruments between each necropsy by immersing them in alcohol 
and flaming them, or by leaving them in an acceptable disinfectant for the 
prescribed time prior to thorough rinsing in sterile water. 
Particular attention must be paid to reusable equipment, instruments,  
vehicles, the environment and your hands.
Ensure that you have water, a wash bucket, nail brush, soap, paper towels  
and spray disinfectant with you. 
Post-mortem examination
180
Samples 
All samples should be marked with the date and a unique identification 
number. Use only one identification number per animal, even if you are 
collecting several samples from the animal. 
data recording 
Complete a detailed necropsy report to document your observations.  
Also complete a sample submission form and list the samples that you  
have collected. 
A4.4 Common post-mortem lesions in chickens
Table A4.1 provides basic information on post-mortem lesions and their 
possible cause. The list is not complete and aims to help persons with little 
experience perform post-mortems on chickens.
Table A4.1  Signs that can be found doing a post-mortem on a chicken (listed in order 
of examination during the post-mortem examination)
Affected part 
of the body lesion Possible cause
Muscles Small haemorrhages  
(blood spots)
Infectious bursal disease (IBD)/Gumboro 
disease or septicaemia
– pale Infestation with blood-sucking parasites
Loss of blood due to injury
Rupture of the liver (fatty liver degeneration)
Metabolic disorder
– dark Death after high fever
Air sacs Cloudy Chronic respiratory disease (CRD), infectious 
bronchitis (IB), colisepticaemia
Pale mucoid thickened Any chronic respiratory disease 
Heart Covered by cheesy material Fowl cholera, fowl typhoid,  
colisepticaemia
Covered with chalk-like 
material
Gout
Fluid in the sac covering the 
heart
Fowl cholera, any disease affecting the 
circulatory system, nephritis
Yellowish colour Metabolic disorder, intoxication
Small haemorrhages Newcastle disease (ND), fowl cholera, highly 
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI),
other acute viral or bacterial infections
Small white spots Fowl typhoid, pullorum disease, Marek’s 
disease, coligranuloma, tuberculosis
Froth in the right atrium The bird was killed by an intravenous  
injection of air.
Appendix 4
181
Affected part 
of the body lesion Possible cause
Abdominal 
cavity
Cheesy content Fowl cholera, colisepticaemia, fowl typhoid
Liquid content Fowl cholera, any heart or liver disease, 
intoxication
Persistent yolk sac Pullorum disease
Tumours in or on various 
organs
Marek’s disease, leucosis, various tumours
Spleen Pale Fowl typhoid
Swelling Fowl typhoid, fowl cholera, Marek’s disease, 
leucosis
Small haemorrhages Fowl typhoid
Small white spots Tuberculosis, coligranuloma
liver Swelling Fowl typhoid, fowl cholera, Marek’s disease, 
leucosis, colisepticaemia
Covered with cheesy material Fowl cholera, fowl typhoid, infection with 
Escherichia coli
Covered with chalk-like 
material
Gout
Small white spots Fowl typhoid, pullorum disease, Marek’s 
disease, leucosis, coligranuloma, tuberculosis
Pale yellow colour Fatty liver degeneration
Small haemorrhages Fowl cholera, fowl typhoid
Round lesions surrounded by 
haemorrhages
Histomoniasis (parasitic disease)
Ovary Bloody Acute infection, intoxication, ND
Semi-solid ova Bacterial infection
Misshapen, discoloured ova The hen has recently stopped laying eggs.
Fowl typhoid, tumours, Marek’s disease
Oviduct Enlarged with cheesy content Inflammation after bacterial infection
lungs Small white spots Fowl typhoid, pullorum disease
Small haemorrhages Fowl cholera
Cheesy content CRD
Foamy content IB
kidneys Pale Fowl typhoid, fatty liver degeneration, IB
Swelling Fowl typhoid
Small haemorrhages Fowl typhoid
Nerves Thickened, greyish Marek’s disease
Table A4.1  (Continued)
Post-mortem examination
182
Affected part 
of the body lesion Possible cause
bursa of 
Fabricius
Abnormal in size (enlarged or 
too small)
IBD
Small haemorrhages ND, IBD/Gumboro
Cheesy content IBD/Gumboro
Small tumours Leucosis
trachea Small haemorrhages ND, laryngotracheitis, gapeworms
Red worms Gapeworms
Yellow–white lesions Fowl pox
Mucous content ND, IB
Cheesy content Infectious laryngotracheitis (ILT), IB
Bloody content ILT
Oesophagus Yellow–white lesions Fowl pox
Proventriculus Small haemorrhages ND, HPAI, intoxication, gout
Blisters Infestation with flukes
Small intestine Ballooning Coccidiosis, bacterial infection
large 
intestine
Nodules Tuberculosis, cancer of the pancreas
Small haemorrhages Coccidiosis, fowl typhoid, fowl cholera, 
necrotic enteritis (bacterial disease), ND
Small stripes or spots Coccidiosis
Foamy content Coccidiosis, fowl typhoid
Mucous content Tapeworms
Cheesy content Coccidiosis
Worms Tapeworms, roundworms, hairworms
Caecum Bloody content Coccidiosis
Cheesy content Chronic coccidiosis, histomoniasis (parasitic 
disease)
Note: Further information on selected diseases is given in Chapter 11.
Table A4.1  (Continued)
Appendix 4
183
Appendix 5
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
A5.1 General information
To identify or confirm the cause of a disease, examination of selected organs 
or tissues in the laboratory may be necessary. A confirmed diagnosis is 
especially important if ND or HPAI is suspected, since these are devastating 
and therefore notifiable diseases.
The diagnosis of an infectious disease can be confirmed by isolating  
the causative agent from affected organs and identifying it. Further  
laboratory examination may also be required to confirm diagnoses of 
diseases or conditions related to poor husbandry or nutrition, or to identify 
inherited conditions.
For best results, samples should be examined as soon as possible after 
collection. There are two options: sick chickens could be sent to the 
laboratory (NOT advisable if an outbreak of ND or HPAI is suspected 
because other flocks could be infected along the way) or samples could  
be collected at post-mortem in the field and conserved before submission  
to the laboratory.
when taking samples during a post-mortem:
•	 collect samples from sick chickens (or when no sick chickens are 
available, from birds that died recently)
•	 make sure that the instruments used to perform the post-mortem are 
disinfected, or at least cleaned with hot water
•	 make sure that the organs chosen for laboratory examination are not 
contaminated with dust or dirt during the post-mortem; handle organs 
using forceps
•	 submit several samples if possible, because this allows a wider range  
of examinations
•	 label all samples clearly.
Further details about the selection of samples for laboratory diagnosis of  
ND are given below. Information on selection of samples for other diseases  
is given in Section A5.5. Information on transport of samples and information 
that should accompany the samples is shown in Section A5.4.
A5.2 Samples for laboratory diagnosis of Newcastle disease 
Samples should be collected from cases of suspected ND for virus isolation 
and identification. Fresh or conserved samples are suitable.
184
If samples will reach the laboratory within 24 hours, the entire head and 
samples of spleen and lung should be put in separate small plastic bags or 
leak-proof containers and kept cool.
If samples may not reach the laboratory within 24 hours, the entire head, the 
long bones, and samples of spleen and lung should be conserved in 50% 
glycerine in saline. These samples must also be kept cool.
A5.3 Samples for diagnosis of highly pathogenic  
 avian influenza
Rapid test for influenza A
If HPAI is suspected, a rapid test for the detection of influenza A virus can be 
used by trained operators. Rapid on-site tests based on chromatographic 
immunoassay using rapid immuno-migration technology have performed best 
under field conditions. 
A positive result with a chromatographic immunoassay test is usually a clear 
indication that the bird is infected with an influenza A virus. A false negative 
result may occur in approximately one in five cases truly positive for influenza 
A (false positives can be expected in up to 5% of uninfected chickens tested). 
Therefore, it is possible that the test will not detect up to approximately 35% 
of infected chickens. The test performs best (at the upper end of the ranges 
stated) when used to confirm a clinical suspicion of HPAI in live chickens that 
are severely ill or in birds that are not long dead, and it is for this purpose 
alone that it should be used. It does not perform well with birds that are 
incubating an infection. 
When the test result is positive, the national HPAI contingency plan should  
be implemented immediately. When the test result is negative, samples  
should still be dispatched for laboratory testing, the area quarantined,  
and carcasses and contaminated material buried until the laboratory results 
are available.
Samples for virus isolation must always be collected
The use of the rapid test is NOT a substitute for the collection of 
specimens for virus isolation. Where HPAI is suspected, laboratory 
specimens must always be submitted for confirmation of the 
diagnosis and typing of the virus involved.
It is important that this kit be stored at 2–30 °C. It is best kept in the refrigerator 
(i.e. at 2–8 °C). DO NOT FREEZE the kit. It must not be stored in direct 
sunlight. If correctly stored, the kit can be used until the expiry date marked on 
the package label.
Appendix 5
185
tissue samples and swabs
Specimens should be collected from at least six birds. Preferably, three 
should be birds showing signs of the acute disease and the other three may 
be recently dead. The sick birds should be humanely slaughtered by cervical 
dislocation by hand or using a burdizzo.
If swabs are available, tracheal or oro-pharyngeal3 swabs should be collected 
and placed in virus transport media.
If swabs are not available then the following tissues should be collected, 
placed in a sealed plastic bag and stored at 4 °C: spleen, lungs, air sacs, 
trachea, heart, pancreas, liver and kidneys. 
If contamination is a problem, or storage conditions not ideal, then the  
whole head and a long bone should be placed in a sealed plastic bag and 
placed on ice.
These specimens should be transported in a secure container to the relevant 
veterinary laboratory. If specialised transport containers are not available, then 
a used, clean paint tin can be used. The plastic bag holding the specimens 
should be placed inside the tin and the tin placed inside a cool box containing 
pre-frozen ice packs.
Before reaching the international reference laboratory, the specimens should 
be stored and transported at 4 °C. The specimens must reach the laboratory 
as quickly as possible, as the virus may be inactivated after 4–7 days.
The specimens should NOT be frozen at –20 °C (i.e. the normal temperature 
in domestic freezers is –10 to –20 °C and so they are NOT suitable for storing 
samples destined for virus isolation). Repeated freezing and thawing must be 
avoided to prevent loss of infectivity. In the laboratory, the specimens will be 
frozen at –80 °C.
Transporting the virus on dry ice (i.e. frozen carbon dioxide) is not 
recommended as: (1) the dry ice may evaporate during the journey causing 
the specimen to thaw; (2) according to the International Air Travel Association 
regulations that cover the transport of goods on planes, dry ice cannot be 
placed in airtight containers; and (3) carbon dioxide can rapidly inactivate 
influenza viruses if it gains access to the specimens through shrinkage of 
tubes during freezing.
Serology
Blood samples should be collected for serum if there are suspicions of  
HPAI having occurred in the recent past, selecting in particular any birds  
that are known to have recovered from a respiratory disease. At the start  
3 Tracheal swabs can be collected from dead birds.  In live birds, it is more likely that samples will be  
collected from the oro-pharyngeal region (i.e. the throat area) as the birds will struggle to prevent the  
entry of the swab into the trachea.
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
186
of an outbreak, given the rapidity of spread of the disease in flocks,  
antibodies will rarely be present. The high fatality rate also leaves little 
opportunity for the virus to leave an antibody ‘footprint’ in the flock.  
Thus, serological tests do not assist greatly in the confirmation of  
HPAI A (H5N1) infections in chickens but can provide useful information in  
the case of ducks and geese. 
Serological investigation in flocks vaccinated with homologous inactivated 
vaccines (i.e. H5N1, the same strain that is responsible for the outbreak) can 
be used to confirm that vaccination has stimulated an adequate immune 
response but not to test for the presence of disease. The use of heterologous 
vaccine (e.g. H5N2) will also affect serological investigations when the tests 
available can determine only the H subtype and not the N type of the virus. 
Serum samples should also be collected from pigs, especially if they are 
showing signs of respiratory disease. 
Sera should be separated from the clot as soon as possible in a clean area, 
taking care to transfer the reference details of each sample to the new tube. 
Sera may be stored at 4 °C for approximately 1 week, but thereafter should  
be frozen at –20 °C. 
Good records and correct documentation are essential
When collecting samples, always record the sample number and 
case details (such as the village name, global positioning system 
(GPS) coordinates, species, history etc.). This will make follow-up 
communication with farmers and further investigations much easier.
A5.4  Sending samples to the laboratory
Organs will decompose at ambient temperature and infectious agents they 
contain may be destroyed. It is therefore very important that samples be 
kept cool until they reach the diagnostic laboratory. Pack samples in a cool 
box with sufficient ice or freezer bricks to keep them cold until they arrive 
at the laboratory. (Only samples conserved in 10% formalin for histological 
examination may be stored at ambient temperature.)
All specimens should be packed to prevent leakage, risk of accidental 
exposure of personnel handling the container, contamination of the sample  
or damage with water.
The cool box containing the samples should be clearly identified and 
accompanied by the following information:
•	 the name and address of the person sending the samples
•	 the date and location of sample collection
Appendix 5
187
•	 case details—age, sex, breed, vaccination and treatment history,  
clinical signs, mortality and description of the outbreak 
•	 differential diagnosis.
Central laboratories will usually have submission forms to record this 
information. It is advisable to have copies of submission forms available  
in field offices. 
A simple and inexpensive container for the transport of hazardous biological 
specimens is described by Blacksell et al. (2006). 
A5.5  Specific collection details 
A5.5.1 Samples for diagnosis of viral diseases
which samples can be used?
Virus isolation can be attempted from affected organs, which should  
be sent whole. Tissues, faeces and samples taken from any body fluid  
or moist surface using a sterile cotton swab can also be used for  
virus isolation.
Collecting the samples
Specimens should be collected by aseptic techniques, using sterile 
instruments and sterile containers. If this is not possible, try to work as  
cleanly as possible using instruments and containers that have been boiled 
shortly before use. Contamination of the specimen from other organs and 
tissues, and the environment (e.g. dust, dirt, feathers) must be avoided.
How to store the samples
•	 Swabs
Swabs should be transferred to a transport medium immediately  
after collection. Suitable media should preferably be obtained in  
advance from the laboratory to which the samples are to be submitted. 
Swabs contain fresh samples and must therefore be sent to the  
laboratory immediately.
•	 Fresh samples
Organs should be wrapped in plastic or placed in small bottles. Wrap or 
pack each organ separately. All fresh samples (organs, tissues, faeces 
and swabs) must be placed in a cool box with ice or icepacks soon after 
collection and submitted to the laboratory immediately.
•	 Conserved samples
Where it is not possible to keep the samples cold, or when it is not certain 
that samples will arrive at the laboratory within 24 hours, organs or tissues 
can be conserved in 50% glycerine (glycerol) in saline and should be kept 
as cold as possible during dispatch. In the laboratory, the samples will be 
processed to isolate the suspected virus.
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
188
A5.5.2 Samples for diagnosis of diseases caused by bacteria or  
 mycoplasmas
which samples can be used?
Bacteria can be isolated from affected organs or fluids inside body cavities. 
Whole affected organs and samples of fluids or from moist surfaces, taken 
using sterile cotton swabs, should be sent to the laboratory. The swab is 
dipped into the fluid or stroked on the surface and then placed in a suitable 
transport medium.
For diagnosis of enteric bacterial diseases, intestinal contents, rectal swabs  
and smears of intestinal mucosa and pathological lesions can be used.  
To take a smear, firmly press a clean glass microscope slide onto the  
suspect area.
Collecting the samples
Specimens should be collected by aseptic techniques, using sterile 
instruments and containers. If this is not possible, try to work as cleanly  
as possible using instruments and containers that have been boiled  
shortly before use. Contamination of the specimen from other organs 
 and tissues, and the environment (e.g. dust, dirt, feathers), must  
be avoided.
If fresh organs are being submitted for bacteriological examination, at the  
time of collection a small block of the organ should be fixed in 10% formalin 
for histopathology.
How to store the samples
•	 Swabs
Swabs should be transferred to a suitable transport medium immediately  
after collection. Suitable media should preferably be obtained in  
advance from the laboratory to which the samples are to be submitted. 
Swabs contain fresh samples and must therefore be sent to the  
laboratory immediately.
•	 Fresh samples
Organs should be wrapped in plastic or placed in small bottles. Wrap or  
pack each organ separately. Organs, and tubes containing transport 
medium with swabs, must be placed into a cool box with sufficient ice or 
icepacks to keep the samples cool until arrival at the laboratory. Samples 
must be submitted to the laboratory immediately.
•	 Conserved samples
In general, all samples for bacteriological examination, except smears, 
should be kept chilled but not frozen, from the time of collection until they 
have arrived at the laboratory. Isolation of bacteria is not possible from 
conserved samples.
•	 Smears
Smears are air-dried and wrapped separately for transportation.
Appendix 5
189
A5.5.3 Samples for diagnosis of fungal diseases
which samples can be used?
Any organs showing lesions can be submitted.
Collecting the samples
Specimens should be collected by aseptic techniques, using sterile instruments 
and containers. If this is not possible, try to work as cleanly as  possible using 
instruments and containers that have been boiled shortly before use. Contamination 
of the specimen from other organs and tissues, and the environment (e.g. dust, dirt, 
feathers), must be avoided. 
Small sections of affected organs should be conserved in 10% formalin for 
histopathological examination.
How to store the samples
Fresh organs for diagnosis of fungal diseases must be stored and transported chilled.
A5.5.4 Samples for diagnosis of parasitic diseases
which samples can be used?
•	 External parasites
Single external parasites (if it is possible to catch them) or infected feathers  
can be collected from the bird or their nests or roosts for identification.
 Scaly leg mites may be isolated by scraping the skin and scales of the 
birds’ legs. (Since the lesions are characteristic for this parasite, laboratory 
confirmation of the diagnosis is rarely necessary.)
•	 worms
Worm eggs can be found in faecal samples. Fresh droppings from several  
birds can be collected and pooled (put together).
 Adult worms found in the intestines can be submitted to a laboratory for 
identification.
 Intestinal contents can also be submitted if infestation with worms is suspected.
•	 Coccidia
Coccidia oocysts can be found in faecal samples. Fresh droppings from  
several birds can be collected and pooled (put together).
 Coccidia can also be found in smears or soft scrapings of intestinal mucosa. 
The mucosa of several sections of the small intestine and the caecum should  
be scraped with cover slips that are then put on slides.
Collecting the samples
If faecal samples are to be examined it is best to collect fresh droppings from 
several birds.
For isolation of scaly leg mites, scrape lesions on the chickens’ legs using  
a knife moistened with paraffin.
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
190
How to store the samples
•	 External parasites, adult worms
External parasites and adult worms can be collected in small leak-proof 
vessels and preserved in 10–15% KOH (potassium hydroxide) or 70% alcohol. 
External parasites found on the skin and feathers can be stored for some time 
before examination without conservation. Scrapings for examination of scaly 
leg mites can be submitted unpreserved in a small container.
•	 Faecal samples, intestinal content
Faecal samples and intestinal content should be kept cool until they reach 
the laboratory. 
•	 Smears 
Smears of intestinal content or mucosa should be kept cool until they reach 
the laboratory.
A5.5.5  Samples for histopathological examination
Histopathological examination of affected organs provides more information 
about the chicken’s reaction to agents that cause disease, and may assist in 
identification of the cause of a disease. 
which samples can be used?
For histological examination, affected organs and tissues can be used.
Collecting the samples
Tissues collected at the port-mortem examination should be preserved 
immediately on collection (Table A5.1). Decomposed or frozen samples  
are unsuitable for histopathological examination.
It is important that only the edges of samples are handled so that  
histological detail is not lost.
•	 Organs
Large organs or blocks do not fix adequately and are unsuitable for 
examination. In general, organs greater than 1 cm in thickness should  
be cut into 1 cm sections. Organs that are less than 1 cm thick can be fixed 
whole. 
•	 Nerves 
Nerves commonly curl and twist when placed in fixative. Lay the nerve flat 
on a piece of card or stiff paper (which can be labelled) and allow to adhere 
for 3–5 minutes. The card with the attached nerve should then be immersed 
in fixative. 
•	 Oesophagus, intestines and other tissues 
The section taken from any of these should include part of the lesion and 
the junction of the diseased portion with the apparently healthy tissue. To 
ensure adequate fixation, sections of unopened oesophagus or intestine 
should be immersed in fixative and gently pulled through the fixative a 
number of times to ensure that fixative enters the lumen. 
Appendix 5
191
How to store the samples
Samples should be fixed in 10% formalin. Always ensure that the tissue is 
preserved in an adequate volume of formalin: the volume of 10% formalin 
used should be at least 10 times that of the tissue to be fixed.
Samples fixed in 10% formalin can be stored for some time before 
examination, even at ambient temperatures.
Table A5.1  Organs or other specimens suitable for laboratory diagnosis of certain 
diseases or syndromes
disease/syndrome Specimen required
Chronic respiratory disease Trachea, choanal (palatine) cleft
Coccidiosis Faecal samples, intestinal content
Swabs or soft scrapings from intestinal mucosa
Portions of intestines showing lesions in formalin  
(for histopathology)
Colisepticaemia Whole, fresh dead chicks
Liver, kidney, lung
Swab samples from the pericardial sac, air sacs and joints
External parasites Parasites, infested feathers
Scraped lesions of scaly legs
Fowl cholera Liver, bone marrow (recommended when specimens 
are not fresh or when contamination of tissues is likely), 
heart blood
Fowl plague, avian influenza Cloacal and tracheal swabs
Trachea, lungs, air sacs, exudate from the sinus 
Fowl pox Recently developed nodular lesions
Fowl typhoid Liver, spleen, heart, ovary
Infectious bursal disease/
Gumboro disease
Bursa of Fabricius
Infectious bronchitis Tracheal swabs, cloacal swabs
Lungs, kidneys, oviduct, caecal tonsils
(Virus might be isolated from cloacal swabs or caecal tonsils 
even several weeks after clinical signs have disappeared.)
Infectious coryza Entire head
Swabs from the sinus cavities
(Tracheal swabs do not always contain the causative 
bacterium.)
Infectious laryngotracheitis Tracheal swabs
Trachea, lung
Marek’s disease Organs with tumours
Nerves (for histopathology)
Newcastle disease Spleen, lung, entire head, long bones
Pullorum disease Whole, fresh dead chicks
Worms Faecal samples, intestinal content
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
192
A5.6 Serology
Serological examinations provide valuable diagnostic information in poultry flocks. 
A variety of methods can be used to detect antibodies and antigens circulating in 
the chickens’ blood for direct or indirect diagnosis of infectious agents.
This appendix does not provide information on techniques used for serological 
examination. It aims to assist with the interpretation of results.
Accurate interpretation of serological findings requires knowledge of the 
efficiency and reliability of the technique used (sensitivity and specificity), and 
information on the course of the disease and the impact of immune reactions 
caused by specific infectious diseases. High antibody titres do not necessarily 
indicate protection against a certain infectious disease: Protection against 
infectious diseases is obtained by a complex cooperation of various 
components of a bird’s immune system, antibodies found in the serum 
being only one of them.
Optimal time for sampling
A serological reaction to any infection can be detected not earlier than 1 week 
after infection or vaccination. In general, blood samples are taken 2 weeks after 
vaccination when high antibody titres are expected.
Sampling size and selected birds
For an infectious agent that spreads quickly within a flock—like the ND or 
HPAI viruses—many positive results can be expected, while only a few positive 
results might be found for a slowly spreading infectious agent. Thus, the 
number of samples to be taken within a flock depends on the percentage of 
expected positive results and on the reliability aimed for the results.
In order to measure whether vaccination has been effective, birds could be 
sampled at a rate sufficient to determine whether 80% of birds had a protective 
titre, with an accuracy of ±10%. (Epidemiological theory suggests that if at 
least 70% of a population is immune then disease outbreaks are unlikely to 
occur because there are not enough susceptibles to propagate an epidemic. 
Determination of 80 ±10% allows an assessment to be made of whether or 
not more than 70% of the population have protective titres.) Table A5.2 lists 
the number of birds would then need to be sampled (sample sizes have been 
rounded up) according to flock size.
Table A5.2 Recommended number of birds to be sampled to determine if 80% of 
a flock has a protective titre after vaccination
Flock size Sample size
100 40
200 60
300 55
400 55
500 60
Appendix 5
193
When selecting birds for sampling, birds of all age groups should be included, 
not just chickens that are easy to catch. True random selection (giving every 
bird the chance to be sampled) provides more comprehensive information on 
the whole flock.
Positive results
Clearly positive serological results, even of single birds within a flock, indicate 
contact with the infectious agent—but not necessarily clinical disease caused by 
this agent (e.g. antibodies for IBD/Gumboro might be found in adult chickens, 
which do not get sick from this disease because IBD/Gumboro affects only 
young chickens). Furthermore, positive results do not reveal whether the 
infection occurred in the past or is still active. To get further information on the 
actual presence of an infectious agent, two samples taken within a certain time 
from the same bird have to be examined (see paired serum samples, below).
Negative results
Clearly negative results obtained from random samples, on the other hand,  
do not prove the absence of a particular infectious agent from the flock.
Paired serum samples
Examination of two samples per chicken with a certain time interval between 
the two samplings is known as examination of ‘paired serum samples’. This 
method is used to get information on the time of infection. The time between 
the two samplings (2 weeks; Table A5.3) should be sufficient for antibody titre 
to develop. 
Table A5.3 Interpretation of paired serological samples
Results Interpretation
1st sampling 2nd sampling
Negative Positive •	A change from a negative to a positive result (antibody status) 
is known as seroconversion and indicates an acute primary 
infection.
Positive Rise in titre •	A significant rise in antibody titre between early and late phase 
samples can indicate an active infection. (It does not reveal 
whether this is the bird’s first infection with this agent.)
•	Rise in antibody titres could also result from booster 
vaccination or stress-induced reactivation of latent infection.
Positive Fall in titre •	A fall in antibody titre between the two samplings indicates  
a previous infection that is no longer active.
•	A few weeks (2–4 weeks) after vaccination the antibody titre 
starts to decline continuously.
Negative Negative •	If both examinations reveal negative results the bird had had 
no contact to the infectious agent at the time of 1
st sampling. 
Nevertheless, recent infection (within the past week) might 
have happened without detectable antibodies being present  
at the time of 2nd sampling.
Thus, seroconversion is more convincing diagnostically than detection of  
a significant rise in titre.
Collection of samples for laboratory examination
194
Appendix 6
Sources of further information
More details on village poultry health and production may be found  
at the following websites:
•	 International Rural Poultry Centre at 
<http://www.kyeemafoundation.org/irpc.php>
•	 International Network for Family Poultry development at 
<http://www.fao.org/ag/AGAinfo/themes/en/infpd/home.html>
•	 danish Network for Smallholder Poultry development at 
<http://www.poultry.kvl.dk>
•	 Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research at 
<http://www.aciar.gov.au>
•	 Food and Agriculture Organization of the united Nations at 
<http://www.fao.org>