# Sheep and Goats for Diverse Products and Profits
# publisher: FAO
# year: unknown
# url: https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/9214102e-3a35-48ad-9c53-ec825f55961e/content
# attribution: FAO, Sheep and Goats for Diverse Products and Profits
# ghana_specific: False
# extent: 54 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

FAO Diversiﬁ cation booklet 9
Sheep and goats 
for diverse products 
and profits
Diversiﬁ cation booklet number 9
Sheep and goats 
for diverse products 
and profits
Geoff Pollott and R. Trevor Wilson
Rural Infrastructure and Agro-Industries Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Rome 2009
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in 
this information product for educational or other non-commercial 
purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from 
the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. 
Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or 
other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission 
of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission should be 
addressed to: Chief Electronic Publishing Policy and Support Branch 
Communication Division FAO Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 
Rome, Italy or by e-mail to: copyright@fao.org
© FAO 2009
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in 
this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal or development status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of speciﬁc 
companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have 
been patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or 
recommended by FAO in preference to others of a similar nature that 
are not mentioned.
Preface v
Acknowledgements vii
Contribution of sheep and goats to sustainable livelihoods 1
Market opportunities 5
 Growth in market demand for small ruminants and their products 5
Beneﬁts of keeping sheep and goats 7
 Outputs from small ruminant production  7
 Dietary contribution of meat and milk products  8
 Beneﬁts at the household level  10
 Beneﬁts to the farming system  12
 National beneﬁts  15
Inputs to small ruminant production systems 17
 Using the right species and breed  17
 Sources for replenishing stock  17
 Keeping livestock healthy  18
 Supplying adequate feed and water  18
 Grazing as a way of using local feeds  19
 Using local materials to make livestock housing and equipment  21
 Labour needs  22
 Preserving livestock products  22
 Adding value to livestock products 23
Support services for small ruminant production 27
 Sustainable services for all  27
 Access to technical and commercial information, loans and credit  29
 Veterinary services  30
 Access to technologies and training  31
 Input supply chains  31
 Markets for produce  31
 Transport  32
 Potential for establishing cooperatives and women’s groups  32
 Food safety regulations  32
Table of contents
Challenges and opportunities  35
Selected further reading  37
Sources of further information and support  41
 
Table of contents
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
The purpose of the FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets is to raise awareness and 
provide decision support information about opportunities at farm and local 
community level to increase the incomes of small-scale farmers.
 Each booklet focuses on a farm or non-farm enterprise that can be 
integrated into small farms to increase incomes and enhance livelihoods. The 
enterprises proﬁled in the FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets selected are suitable 
for smallholder farmers in terms of resource requirements, additional costs, 
exposure to risk and complexity. The products or services generated by the 
enterprises are suitable for meeting demand on a growing, or already strong, 
local market and are not dependent on an export market.
 The main target audience for these booklets are people and organizations 
that provide advisory, business and technical support services to resource-
poor small-scale farmers and local communities in low- and middle-income 
countries. It is hoped that enough information is given to help these support 
service providers to consider new income-generating opportunities and how 
these might enable small-scale farmers to take action. What are the potential 
beneﬁts? What are farmer requirements and constraints? What are critical 
‘success factors’? 
 The FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets are also targeted to policy-makers and 
programme managers in government and non-governmental organizations. 
What actions might policy-makers take to create enabling environments for 
small-scale farmers to diversify into new income-generating activities?
 The FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets are not intended to be technical ‘how 
to do it’ guidelines. Readers will need to seek more information or technical 
support, so as to provide farmer advisory and support activities relating to 
the introduction of new income-generating activities. To assist in this respect, 
Preface
v
vi
each booklet identiﬁes additional sources of information, technical support and 
website addresses. 
 A CD has been prepared with a full series of FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets 
and  relevant FAO technical guides, together with complementary guides 
on market research, ﬁnancing, business planning, etc. Copies of the CD are 
available on request from FAO. FAO Diversiﬁcation booklets can also be 
downloaded from the FAO Internet site.
 If you ﬁnd this booklet of value, we would like to hear from you. Tell 
your colleagues and friends about it. FAO would welcome suggestions about 
possible changes for enhancing our next edition or regarding relevant topics 
for other booklets. By sharing your views and ideas with us we can provide 
better services to you.
  
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
vii
Acknowledgements
Gratitude is owed to Florence Tratanac, Agro-industries Ofﬁcer, and Alexandra 
Röttger, Agribusiness Economist, Rural Infrastructure and Agro-Industries 
Division (AGS), FAO, for providing detailed reviews and comments on the 
booklet.
Acknowledgements for the series
Gratitude is owed to Doyle Baker, Chief, Rural Infrastructure and Agro-
Industries Division (AGS), FAO, for his vision, encouragement and constant 
support in the development of the FAO Diversiﬁcation booklet series. Thanks 
are also due to Josef Kienzle, Agro-Industries Ofﬁcer, AGS, FAO, for his 
patience, commitment, and contributions to the production and post-production 
of the series. Clare Bishop-Sambrook, principal editor of the series, provided 
technical support and guidance, both during the development and ﬁnalization 
of the booklets. Martin Hilmi provided both technical and editorial inputs and 
managed the post-production phase of the series. Fabio Ricci undertook the 
design and layout of the booklets and desktop publishing. 

FIGURE 1 Contributions to human welfare (sheepskins in Aranghai Province, Mongolia, 
that will be cured for home use and for sale as winter clothing)
(Photo by R. T. Wilson)
1
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
Almost three billion people, or almost 
half of the world’s population, live on 
less than US$2 per day. More than 1.2 
billion of these, or about 20 percent 
of the world population, live on less 
than US$1 per day. Poverty is largely, 
but by no means only, a phenomenon 
of the rural areas. Effective poverty 
reduction measures can only be 
successful if the livelihoods of the 
rural poor can be improved.
 Sheep and goats belong to the 
group of animals called small 
ruminants. Small-scale farmers keep 
small ruminants for both subsistence 
and economic reasons and, in 
either role, they generally improve 
household livelihoods, but they have 
the capability to do much more. Small 
ruminants contribute to landless, rural 
farming, peri-urban and increasingly 
to urban households by providing 
food, heat, income, socio-cultural 
wealth and clothing (see Figure 1).
 They also make important indirect 
contributions to households through 
Contribution of sheep and goats
to sustainable livelihoods
FIGURE 2 Boy hearding goats in Niger
(Photo: © F AO/23786/R. Lemoyne)
2
the use of crop by-products, 
integration with other farming 
enterprises, use of household wastes 
and locally grown vegetation, soil 
fertility improvements and their roles 
in the social, cultural and religious 
aspects of everyday life. In particular 
they contribute to the empowerment 
of women and of children who 
often have responsibility for the 
management, production and health 
of small ruminants (see Figure 2). At 
the regional and national level, sheep 
and goats contribute to supplying 
markets with food and non-food 
products with export-earning and 
import-saving potential.
 Small ruminants, such as sheep 
and goats, ﬁt well into smallholder 
farming systems. The species of 
animal reared (sheep or goats or 
both) in smallholder systems differ 
by region, country, and ethnic and 
religious groups. Their grazing 
preferences enable them to feed on 
weeds, shrubs and other plants that 
other species of domestic animals 
tend to refuse. Their small size means 
they require less space than larger 
animals and they are less likely to 
damage and compact soils. They 
are easier to work with than large 
ruminants and are cheaper to buy and 
maintain. Moreover, under the right 
conditions, they can be quite proliﬁc, 
but this fact is not well known. The 
range of products produced by small 
ruminants is easy to market because 
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
3
demand is high, yet largely unfulﬁlled. 
 Although these animals are 
distributed widely throughout the 
world, the potential of sheep and 
goats is often not realized. Policy-
makers and administration tend 
to overlook their contributions to 
the economy, rural and peri-urban 
livelihoods, the empowerment of  
women, other marginalized groups 
and food security. At the household 
level, they often survive by 
scavenging, thereby losing a lot of 
their productive potential. Hence, 
there are considerable opportunities 
for small livestock keepers to use 
their animals more effectively and 
efﬁciently, and thus increase their 
contribution to improved livelihoods, 
underpinned by a comprehensive 
range of support services.
 Hence the aim of this booklet is 
threefold:
• to highlight the benefits of 
keeping sheep and goats;
• to identify the key inputs into 
smallholder livestock systems  
to improve productivity;
• to identify the range of support 
services required and the 
challenges of service provision.

5
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
Market opportunities
 Growth in market demand 
 for small ruminants 
 and their products
The huge demand that is predicted 
to arise for livestock products in 
the ﬁrst quarter of the 21st century, 
driven almost entirely by population 
growth, rising incomes and increasing 
urbanization in developing countries, 
presents an opportunity for small 
livestock producers. They can exploit 
these markets in order to increase 
their income, employment and social 
development and to improve the 
sustainability of their farms. Most of 
the increased demand will be in the 
larger, and still expanding, towns and 
cities and this will be of particular 
beneﬁt to peri-urban farmers. 
Wherever the farms are located, the 
successful marketing of products will 
be critical.
 A key factor in any marketing 
chain, and often overlooked by 
farmers, is consumer needs and the 
choices available to them. Producers 
must provide what is required 
by consumers, otherwise prices 
are likely to be low or goods will 
remain unsold. Although this sounds 
obvious, it needs to be addressed 
in order to create more sustainable 
farming systems. The rise in demand 
for livestock products is commonly 
associated with higher levels of 
disposable income and an increasing 
level of sophistication amongst 
consumers. In such a situation, 
consumer demand for livestock 
products will increasingly be based 
on quality as well as supply regularity 
at a reasonable price. Low prices 
may not be so critical in success as 
disposable incomes rise. Successful 
small farm enterprises will need to 
know what the market requires and 
be able to respond to it. Traditional 
markets may well continue to exist, 
but these new markets represent a 
challenge to small farmers who will 
need to be well organized to capitalize 
on these additional opportunities.
 The ability to respond to market 
demands is an important factor in 
being able to make the most of new 
and expanding market outlets. This 
may be in terms of the type of product 
required or for the quality standards 
desired by new consumers of animal 
products. If small farmers want to 
respond to such consumer demands 
they may need to change the species 
6
of livestock they keep as well as the 
products derived from them. They 
may also need to change the methods 
of processing and marketing that 
they typically use. Farmers should 
be encouraged to adapt their farming 
systems to meet consumer needs, 
but will require policy and practical 
support to enable them to achieve 
these changes. This may take the 
form of training, credit, additional 
services or advice which should be 
delivered with the target group clearly 
identiﬁed.
 While traditional markets in rural 
areas will continue to be important, 
more modern outlets including 
supermarkets are likely to be the 
prime mechanism for delivery to 
meet the increased urban demand. 
In these circumstances, it is unlikely 
that individual small farmers will be 
able to respond to demand on their 
own. The creation of cooperative or 
joint marketing ventures seems the 
most likely way forward. These may 
be owned by the farmers themselves 
or operated by entrepreneurs with 
the necessary infrastructure and 
experience to make them work. 
Farmer-owned cooperatives have 
the advantage that the farmers 
themselves are in control of the 
operation and will beneﬁt directly 
from the increased income streams 
and increased sustainability that 
will follow. If farmers lack the skills 
required to make such an operation 
work effectively, an entrepreneurial 
marketing system may be a more 
efﬁcient and effective operation, 
but farmers will lose control over 
the pricing and marketing of their 
products once they leave the farm. 
Innovative forms of linking producers 
to markets, such as the formation of 
strategic alliances between farmers, 
processors and supermarket chains, 
are further options to be considered.
 The nature of the product will 
inﬂuence the type of marketing 
system needed. Highly perishable 
products transported to distant 
markets will require a much greater 
investment in infrastructure than less 
perishable products (for example, 
fresh milk in comparison with salted 
meat). Integrated marketing chains 
including food processing and supply 
to the retailer may be necessary for 
dairy and meat products. The more 
sophisticated the supply chain, the 
more removed farmers are likely 
to become from the selling process. 
Although well-trained professional 
staff may be more effective in such 
operations, it may represent additional 
risks to individual small farmers and 
may make their farms less sustainable 
in the long-term. 
Table 1 Beneﬁts from small ruminants
Products By-products Indirect beneﬁts Intangible beneﬁts
Meat
Manure as 
fertilizer
Weed control 
Reduction and spread of risk 
from crop operations
Milk Generation and accumulation 
of capital
Skins Generation of income and 
smoothing out cash ﬂow
Fibre
Dung as fuel 
and for biogas 
production
Fulﬁlling social, cultural 
and religious needs and 
obligations
Horns Providing status or prestige 
in the immediate community
Offal Use in sport, culture 
and recreation
7
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
Beneﬁts of keeping 
sheep and goats
 Outputs from small ruminant 
 production
The outputs from small ruminant 
animals can be grouped into products, 
by-products, and indirect and 
intangible beneﬁts (see Table 1). 
Immediate products include meat 
and milk and their processed 
products such as cheese, wool and 
hair (including mohair) and skins 
and other minor ones. Economic 
and environmental beneﬁts are 
derived from dung (which improves 
soil fertility and structure) and from 
nutrient recycling. Indirect beneﬁts, 
representing those beneﬁts that are 
not the primary purpose for keeping 
the animals, include weed control. 
CASE STUDY 1  Sheep as an economic and cultural asset in Mexico
In the Tzotzil area of Chiapas, Mexico, sheep husbandry is culturally linked to the 
responsibilities of the female head of the household. The sheep are kept primarily for 
wool production, but play a secondary role in other agricultural and cultural aspects 
of the household. Wool production is traditionally linked to clothes production and 
is associated with a considerable amount of indigenous knowledge both in sheep 
husbandry and in processing wool.
Sheep husbandry has a direct impact on annual household income. Tzotzil women 
generate direct income through the sale of sheep, ﬂeeces, woollen clothes, woollen 
handicrafts and manure. Sheep also increase crop yields in manure-fertilized cropland, 
which results in increased income when the crops are sold. Sheep represent 30 
percent of total income in Tzotzil villages.
Fleeces produced in the household, plus some bought in the market, are hand-
processed into traditional Tzotzil clothes for the family. Fleeces are washed and 
carded, spun using a spindle, and woven by means of an ancient back-strap loom. 
These activities may not represent an economic use of resources, but the cultural 
output is a key factor in this system and sheep play an important role in this context.
Toztil women have developed their own system for measuring wool production, using 
subjective estimates of greasy ﬂeece volume and quality, which correspond well 
with the more objective measures used in the commercial wool industry. Wool has 
cultural meaning, social importance and economic implications in this society. Any 
interventions targeting sheep husbandry have to take all these factors into account.
8
 Perhaps of equal importance are 
the notional outputs of wealth, status, 
security and the even less tangible 
social beneﬁts of empowerment, self-
esteem, pride and social interaction 
and inclusion which small stock can 
engender (see Case Study 1). In many 
societies livestock also have religious 
and cultural signiﬁcance.
 Dietary contribution of meat and  
 milk products
Small ruminants (as indeed all 
animals) provide the potential for a 
more varied and healthier diet than 
that obtained from a pure crop system. 
Meat and milk and their processed 
products provide a more interesting 
nutritional regime for the household 
and also supply the minor but essential 
nutrients (minerals and vitamins) as 
well as the major nutrients (protein 
and energy) in the form of fats and 
carbohydrates.
 Animal products that are edible 
can contribute signiﬁcantly to the 
improvement of household health and 
are particularly valuable for children. 
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
9
cereals. Meat also supplies iron that 
is easily absorbed and assists with the 
absorption of iron from other foods, 
in addition to assisting the absorption 
of zinc. These products are also rich 
sources of some group B vitamins. 
Milk and dairy products
Milk is a fundamental product in 
human nutrition. It is the neonatal 
or ‘baby’ food of all mammal 
species. The milk of many species 
of domesticated animal is generally 
suitable for human consumption. 
Milk is an important source of 
dietary protein and calcium, which 
are important for growth and bone 
formation. Potassium, phosphorus 
and trace elements are also present 
in milk. Milk is also usually a good 
source of vitamin C, vitamin B12 
and some other B complex vitamins 
(riboﬂavin and thiamine) and of 
carotene, which is the precursor of 
vitamin D. 
 In many nomadic societies and 
in many small mixed crop livestock 
systems, goats and sheep are the 
major source of milk for the family 
even though production per individual 
animal is small. Some people are 
intolerant of lactose, especially in 
bovine milk, but many are able to use 
the milk of other species. Goat milk 
is often a substitute for cow milk in 
these cases and is well tolerated by 
almost everyone. 
Animal products provide the best 
quality protein in the human diet. 
Low animal protein intake can result 
in a high incidence of Kwashiorkor 
in children (malnutrition caused by 
inadequate protein intake despite 
a fairly good total calorie intake), 
high infant mortality, malnutrition 
in adults, and a general weakening 
of the body which predisposes it to 
disease. A restricted protein intake 
also leads to disturbances in growth 
and development in children that 
extend not only to physical but also 
to mental development. 
 The recommended total minimum 
protein intake for an adult is 85.9 
grams daily of which 34 grams (40 
percent) should be of animal origin. 
Animal products supply about 17 
percent of the energy and 32 percent 
of the protein eaten by people. 
Although there are considerable 
regional differences regarding the 
role of animal products in the diet, 
the main source of future demand 
will come from developing countries 
as incomes increase and the demand 
for a more varied and higher quality 
diet intensiﬁes. 
Meat and meat by-products
Meat and its products are sources of 
high quality protein. The composition 
of amino acids in meat usually 
compensates for deﬁciencies arising 
in staple diets relying largely on 
10
  In addition to its value as a food, 
milk has (and is often considered to 
have) medicinal properties. In some 
societies, and for some species of 
animal, milk is also believed to have 
magical properties. 
 Beneﬁts at the household level
Income and food security
The presence of sheep and goats 
around the home or garden can 
provide immediate daily food 
particularly in the form of milk and 
its products. Small ruminants not only 
provide food security through ready 
accessibility, but they also increase 
the diversity of food and cash sources 
and thus reduce the risk that might 
otherwise be associated with limited 
food and cash supplies.
 Small livestock also improve 
household assets by providing fuel, 
clothing and additional sources of 
income. For example, value can be 
added to meat by preservation and 
making better use of by-products 
including the offal for food, intestines 
for sausage skins and various organs 
in cosmetics or as traditional or 
modern medical products.
Empowering women and children
Women and children are usually the 
managers, if not actually the owners, 
of small ruminants. They derive some 
socio-economic beneﬁts from this 
activity, not only in terms of access to 
food and cash (this may be their only 
source of cash), but also through more 
subtle changes in their status. This 
may arise from the empowerment 
conferred on managers of livestock, 
and the sense of purpose and cultural 
identity that may follow, for example, 
through participating in training and 
extension activities. 
Special role in poverty alleviation
Small ruminants contribute to the 
livelihoods of all their owners, but 
particularly to the poor and otherwise 
marginalized groups including the 
chronically sick or families that have 
been affected by sickness (see Case 
Study 2). This is achieved by:
• providing food and other products 
directly to their owners;
• being one of the few assets 
readily available to the poor thus 
being crucial in maintaining 
household survival during crisis; 
• acting as an important component 
of farming systems through 
increasing the diversity of 
production, lowering risk, and 
reducing fluctuations in cash flow 
especially in harsh environments;
• contributing to environmental 
objectives and the sustainable use 
of resources through the ef
fect of 
manure on soil quality and water 
retention;
CASE STUDY 2  An AIDS orphan in Uganda
Ruth is an AIDS orphan. Both her parents died when she was 13 years old and she 
had to move, together with her two younger brothers, about 250 kilometres to live 
with her aunt and her grandmother. At 15 she is doing very well at school and was 
chosen to receive goats from FARM-Africa because the income from the goats 
would enable her to carry on with her schooling. Ruth says: 
“My grandmother is now getting old and is unwell so it is important 
that, as well as going to school, I work to help my brothers. The goats 
will mean that the three of us can complete school as not only we will 
have milk for the family, we will have extra that we can sell”.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
11
• assisting marginalized groups and 
the poor to obtain private benefits 
from common property resources;
• making the difference between 
survival and abject poverty 
for various types of producers 
including pastoralists, share 
croppers and part-time farmers; 
• acting as a readily available 
‘current’
 account that can rapidly 
be sold when short term needs 
arise for small or medium 
accounts of cash and as a ‘capital’ 
account that can be accumulated 
for longer term and more 
substantial needs;
• allowing and encouraging access 
to social support networks and 
cultural and social well-being.
Using local feedstuffs and 
feedstuffs not suitable for
  
human consumption
Many small ruminants exist on by-
products from crop production (see 
Figure 3), on tree fodder (leaves, 
twigs and fruits) and on household 
wastes. The use of these by-products 
for livestock feed confers a value on 
them that they would not otherwise 
have. 
 They also contribute to the 
production of food and other animal 
products from what would otherwise 
be waste. This increases the efﬁciency 
of the household and farm system and 
effectively recycles waste materials. 
FIGURE 3 Sheep grazing on barley stubble
(Photo ICARDA)
12
 Beneﬁts to the farming system
Recycling nutrients in the soil
Small ruminants play an important role 
in recycling nutrients in the soil. The 
use of crop wastes as feed facilitates 
the return of nutrients to the soil via 
the production of manure and urine.
 However, manure has to be treated 
carefully. If fresh manure has a high 
roughage content, micro-organisms 
will have difﬁculty in decomposting it, 
hence there will be a loss of nutrients 
  
caused by run-off or volatilisation. 
 It is best that manure is composted  
over a period of time. This enables 
the breakdown of roughage and the 
decomposition of weed seeds that 
lose their germinative power. Harmful 
substances in the ﬁrst stage of 
decomposition are also eliminated.
 The careful management and use 
of manure and urine can result in 
improved soil fertility, improved soil 
structure and higher humus levels, 
thereby increasing crop production. 
CASE STUDY 3  Mixed livestock-crop farming in the Central African 
  High lands (Rwanda, Burundi and Eastern Zaire)
This system is characterized by intensively cultivated areas at altitudes higher than 1 500 m.  
Individual holding sizes are very small, averaging less than 0.9 ha (of which 0.75 ha 
is under food crops). The main crops are banana (mostly for brewing beer, with cooking 
and dessert bananas being much less important), annual subsistence and cash crops. 
Haricot beans, cassava and sweet potatoes are grown in association with bananas. The 
many minor crops include pigeon peas, maize, sorghum, various cucumbers and gourds, 
groundnuts, Irish potatoes and cocoyams or taro, and a great variety of green vegetables. 
The aim is to provide a constant supply of food throughout the year. A few trees (mostly 
Cupressus and Eucalyptus) assure a supply of fuel and coffee provides cash income. 
Cropping patterns are inﬂuenced as much by social factors as by climate and soils. 
The highlands are rarely considered to be important for livestock, but almost all families own 
ruminants and poultry. Cattle used to be important culturally, but the high human density 
(more than 600 people per km
2) has resulted in greatly reduced numbers. In the past there 
were taboos against eating sheep meat in some areas, but these are fading and the rearing 
of both goats and sheep is being encouraged by the political authorities and extension 
agents. Animals are closely integrated in the whole system. Almost all families own at least 
one species of ruminant and many own three. The number of animals owned is small but 
varies, as does the mix of species, with ecological zone. They are used for subsistence and 
to generate cash. 
Agricultural by-products are fed to animals by over 80 percent of owners; the type and 
amount of which varies seasonally including banana leaves (mostly in the short dry and rains 
seasons), sweet potato vines and peelings (mostly in the long dry season) and haricot beans. 
The provision of green fodder, supplementary to grazing, is common, with many farmers 
growing forage for this purpose. Manure is collected and spread directly on the arable land 
or composted with waste produce from the farm or house. 
Animal productivity is well below optimum because of poor extension services, inadequate 
veterinary support and a lack of market information. These problems are not insurmountable 
and if services could be provided, and coupled with the use of anti-erosion terraces for 
growing forage grasses and tree legumes such as Leucaena leucocephala to improve animal 
nutrition, livestock output could be improved considerably.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
13
Integration with crop/horticultural 
production
Combinations of crops and livestock 
in the same farming system is usually 
mutually beneﬁcial (see Case Study 
3). This is caused by the recycling 
beneﬁts mentioned previously, but 
also in part from the complementary 
requirements of crops and livestock 
in many situations. Arable rotations 
on the farm, relay cropping in the 
garden, or permanent tree crops 
frequently include stock grazing on 
crop material in the ﬁeld for their 
deposits of manure and urine. 
FIGURE 4 Local housing for sheep and goats in Togo 
(Photo by R. T. Wilson)
14
Input requirements
Where there is the potential for choice 
of possible uses of resources, small 
ruminants offer several advantages 
over many other enterprise options. 
The needs of sheep and goats are less 
than for larger livestock:
• the initial cost of the animals is 
small;
• they can use waste household 
resources;
• they can be kept near the home;
• they need less feed and water in 
cut-and-carry systems; 
• they often do not require 
specialized housing (see Figure 4);
• they are suited to a scavenging 
or partly scavenging production 
system.
Contribution to peri-urban 
livelihoods
The huge increase in the urban 
populations, many of whom have a 
rural background and have little cash 
to buy food, has led to a lar
ge number 
of peri-urban livestock keepers. The 
systems of production rely more 
on scavenger grazing, household
FIGURE 5 Goats on their way to market in Mali
(Photo: © F AO/10995/J. van Acker)
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
15
 
waste, small gardens, with purchased 
feed as a source of nutrients. In this 
environment, farming is not the 
major occupation or source of income 
for the family but, nevertheless, the 
small livestock play an important 
supporting role.
 National beneﬁts
Sheep and goats contribute to the 
national economy by, among other 
things, providing food. The collective 
contribution of many tens or perhaps 
hundreds of thousands of producers 
of small ruminants supply very large 
numbers of animals to home markets 
and thereby help reduce imports. 
These animals, in particular, provide 
further downstream opportunities 
for processing industries based on 
livestock products, such as milk 
processing or skins. There may also 
be the potential to export live animals 
and their products. 
 This is an example of the win-win 
situation of the small ruminant sector 
whereby, not only is foreign exchange 
conserved by home production, but 
also gained through supplying export 
demand (see Figure 5).

17
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
Inputs to small ruminant 
production systems
 Using the right species and breed
The basic unit of production in all 
livestock systems is the animal. 
Selecting or using the best genetic 
resource for the function the animal 
is expected to fulﬁl and for the 
production environment is of critical 
importance. The right balance 
between productivity and health, 
ﬁtness and adaptive traits is vital. 
 In most farming systems breeds 
or types have already been developed 
so that local livestock are adaptable  
to the local climate, system stresses 
and productivity requirements. 
Where natural or man-made disasters 
have devastated genetic resources or 
where new production requirements 
have become necessary, there may be 
a range of genetic resources suitable 
for these conditions. 
 The correct choice is crucial 
to future success and the correct 
balance between productivity and 
‘ﬁtness’ must be considered very 
carefully. The tendency to choose 
supposedly highly productive 
animals, while largely ignoring 
disease and climatic adaptation, is 
widespread, but the costs of coping 
with new disease or environmental 
conditions add considerably to the 
costs of production. The choice of 
a species, breed or type that is well 
adapted to the total environment 
(climate, management, disease and 
feed availability) saves considerably 
on the resources that may otherwise 
be needed to offset the choice of the 
wrong animal (see Figure 6).
 Sources for replenishing stock
All livestock systems require stock 
to be replaced at some time in the 
production cycle. It is important to 
arrange this replacement in the most 
appropriate and cost effective way. 
In many situations it is sensible to 
keep replacements from amongst 
the offspring produced on the farm. 
However, sometimes it is necessary 
to go outside the home environment, 
and the purchase of stock locally and 
of the same breed type may well be 
the ‘best practice’. 
 Care must be taken not to use 
highly inbred stock that may result 
from the lack of introduction of new 
genes into the local population. The 
‘worst practice’ may be the choice of 
exotic or imported stock because of 
their high production potential with 
FIGURE 6 Improved rams (Djallonké breed) in Togo 
(Photo: © F AO/19981)
18
 The availability of affordable 
animal medicines and the routine 
(prophylactic) treatment of animals 
for diseases known to be present in an 
area are important aspects of livestock 
management. Hence producers need 
access to information and knowledge 
about the correct use of medicines. 
 Supplying adequate feed 
 and water
A major objective of smallholder 
systems is to make them as self-
sustaining as possible. This means 
that feeds and water as well as 
livestock resources are available. 
It may sometimes be necessary, 
however, to buy in feedstuffs   
no regard to their adaptation to local 
conditions.
 Keeping livestock healthy
The maintenance of animals in a 
healthy state is an important factor 
in sustainable development. Animal 
health is a crucial aspect of production 
and it may also have implications for 
human health. An animal disease 
that affects or can be transferred 
to humans is known as a zoonose; 
examples include tuberculosis (most 
often transferred through drinking 
raw milk) and helminth infections 
that may involve animals and humans 
in alternative stages of a parasitic life 
cycle such as tapeworms. 
FIGURE 7 Blackhead Persian sheep grazing on rangeland under Mount Meru in Tanzania
(Photo by R. T. Wilson)
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
19
from outside the farm that need to 
be appropriate in terms of quality 
and cost. If the local market does not 
supply appropriate feed resources, 
policies should be introduced or 
orientated towards providing locally 
grown and processed feed resources 
at a realistic cost. This will help 
provide a sustainable system for both 
growers and livestock keepers. 
 Better still, small stock keepers 
should be encouraged to grow their 
own feeds by using such techniques 
as intercropping, alley cropping, 
forage and multipurpose trees or local 
processing of arable crop products. 
Protein sources such as the by-
products of oil extraction from arable 
crops could be developed locally 
and the growing of alternative feed 
sources should be encouraged. 
Careful selection of plant species to 
provide the right balance of animal 
nutrients is crucial and might need 
to take into account the ecology 
of the rumen. Local roughage and 
carbohydrates are also important 
for ruminant systems for which by-
products and residues from arable 
crops are a useful source.
 Grazing as a way of using 
 local feeds
Livestock obtain much of their 
nutritional need through grazing (see 
Figure 7). Not only are livestock able 
CASE STUDY 4  Goats and sheep as a multi-purpose species in Syria
In the semiarid areas of West Asia and North Africa, small ruminants play a key role in 
the use of by-products from arable cropping and utilize a break crop in arable rotations. 
They also provide a valuable means to recycle nutrients in a fragile agro-ecosystem 
and provide additional income to households, as well as contributing to religious and 
cultural aspects of everyday life. 
In Northern Syria fat-tailed Awassi sheep are well adapted to the local climatic and 
farming conditions. They tolerate heat well and graze on a range of low quality forage 
sources, but also respond well to supplementary feeding or improved diets. Typical 
farming systems for the area involve wheat, barley, lentils, vetch, local lucerne varieties 
and watermelons in various rotations that often include a fallow period. 
Sheep and goats ﬁt well into these farming systems and receive a variety of feeds 
depending on the time of year and the stage of their reproductive cycle. Low quality 
feeds such as straw are widely used to cover an animal’s maintenance requirements. 
In addition, steppe grassland, roadsides and marginal land are an important source 
of feed from autumn to early spring. High energy feeds such as barley and legume 
grains and industrial by-products (for example, cotton seed cake and citrus pulp) are 
also used to meet the nutritional needs of the animals. 
The critical times of the year are winter and spring when the ewes are pregnant and 
lactating. The use of high quality supplements at these times helps both the animals 
and the natural pasture, which can be rested and allowed to set seed. The use of 
improved grazing in the summer (in the form of a specially grown forage crop) also 
aids the use of straw stubbles and helps prevent overgrazing on the fragile rangeland. 
Thus the rational use of a complex range of animal feeds supports sheep and goat 
production in a highly fragile environment.
20
to harvest feeds that suit their nutrient 
requirements but they can also:
• harvest material and turn it 
into useful products that would 
otherwise be lost to agricultural 
production; 
• use natural grassland or rangeland 
areas that would otherwise 
provide little or no economic 
benefit (see Case Study 4);
• encourage re-growth of beneficial 
plant species in pastures;
• discourage the growth or invasion 
of an area by unwanted plant 
species;
• maintain landscapes and 
particular agro-ecosystems in a 
way that would not otherwise be 
possible.
 
 
Grazing or herding is often carried 
out communally and in an organized 
fashion that brings collective beneﬁts 
to the whole community. However, 
too many animals on an area may 
FIGURE 8 A goat pen still under construction in Burkina Faso
(Photo: © F AO/22152/A. Wagner)
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
21
lead to overgrazing. Careful attention 
should be paid to achieving the correct 
balance between the needs of the 
animals and those of the ecosystem, 
since this is critical to long-term 
sustainability. In particular situations 
this may require attention to questions 
of land tenure and access rights at 
both local and national levels.
 Using local materials to make 
 livestock housing and equipment
Local materials should be used 
whenever possible. Methods from 
foreign production systems are not 
always appropriate and may lead to 
unsustainable practices if applied 
without adaptation. 
 Most smallholder livestock can 
be kept in buildings and pens made 
from local materials, such as wood 
or sun dried bricks, thatch from local 
grasses and bush poles (see Figure 8). 
These materials are usually cheap and 
readily available at little more than 
the cost of farm labour. Indigenous 
does not necessarily mean basic and 
the scope for innovation in this area 
is considerable. 
 With regard to human health, less 
traditional materials may be necessary 
for surfaces that are in contact with 
food products and may harbour 
harmful bacteria or other pathogens if 
they are not cleaned properly.
22
 Labour needs
Livestock can be labour demanding, 
even in extensive systems if they 
have to be guarded or herded. In more 
intensive systems, labour is required 
for cutting and carrying forage or 
other types of feed to the livestock 
each day. Children often undertake 
some of these tasks, but this may 
conﬂict with their formal education 
requirements. 
 In addition to feeding and tending 
animals, a regular supply of labour 
is required for milking. This is often 
carried out by women and may 
be combined with other domestic 
activities. Care is required to ensure 
that increased workloads do not 
conﬂict with women’s other income 
earning activities or be detrimental to 
their health. For example, different 
methods of housing, fencing or 
tethering can assist in reducing labour 
requirements. 
 Preserving livestock products
Many animal products, particularly 
those intended for human food, are 
highly perishable. Damp conditions or 
poor storage lead to spoilage caused 
by bacterial infection. If the products 
are consumed immediately within 
the home, spoilage is not likely to 
be a problem. However, if they are 
marketed outside the household it 
may be necessary to convert them to 
a product that has a longer ‘shelf-life’, 
thus preventing deterioration. 
 In some areas, meat preservation 
is common, by drying, smoking 
or preserving as cooked products. 
Examples include hams, sausages, 
dried meat, etc. Refrigeration or 
freezing may be necessary for some 
products and is likely to become more 
necessary as consumer awareness of 
quality and health increases. 
 Fresh milk is a highly perishable 
product because it is an ideal medium 
for bacterial proliferation and 
deteriorates quickly especially in hot 
and unhygienic conditions. Many 
traditional and modern preservation 
processes can be employed to 
extend the shelf-life of milk in fresh 
form including refrigeration and 
sterilization. These can be expensive 
but the value of the product, both to 
the consumer and to the health of 
the nation, justiﬁes the cost. Milk is 
generally conserved by traditional 
methods in one of four groups of 
products: fermented milks; butter 
and butter oils; cheese and curds; 
and other milk products. Fermented 
products are often the result of 
natural souring; indeed this is such 
a common product that many people 
who rely on milk for much of their 
nutrition prefer soured to fresh milk. 
Unfortunately sour milk itself is 
susceptible to spoiling, if kept for 
long periods, and souring does not kill 
many potential pathogenic organisms, 
FIGURE 9 In a small cheese processing plant, a woman holds a ﬁnished cheese, Honduras
(Photo: © F AO/22051/G. Bizzarri)
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
23
such as bacteria of tuberculosis. 
 Whatever method of preser vation 
or transformation is used, all products 
have a maximum shelf-life, after  
which they may become unusable. 
Many processes can be carried 
out at the household level, but the 
development of local processing 
plants, perhaps on a cooperative 
or group basis (see Figure 9) is 
also an option and may be more 
economic if there is a concentration 
of production in the local area.
 Further information about food 
preservation methods may be found 
in FAO Diversiﬁcation booklet No. 5  
‘Processed foods for improved 
livelihoods’ (covering a variety of foods).
 Adding value to livestock 
 products
There are many opportunities at the 
household level to process edible and 
inedible livestock products in order 
to improve the income of livestock 
enterprises. Value can be added to 
fresh meat by traditional methods 
of preservation, including salting, 
drying and smoking. Under suitable 
climatic conditions of hot sun and a 
dry atmosphere, very good quality dry 
meat can be produced. Simple drying 
is suitable for small-scale production 
and avoids the high capital, operating 
and maintenance costs of more 
sophisticated equipment. For slightly 
larger lots simple solar driers, wood 
FIGURE 10 Value added products from raw milk in India
Milk
Dahi Paneer ChhanaMishti Doi Kheer
Makhan Chhas
Chakka Lassl
Chhana
murki
Sandesh
BasundiKulﬁ
Rabri
Pantooa
Rasogolia
Khoa
Shrikhand
Shrikhand
vadi
Ghee Kadhi Barﬁ Peda Kalakand Gulab jamun Rasmalai
Culture Condense
1.0:1.5 1.0:1.5
Concentrate,
boll with
rice and sugar
Culture
Press
Precipitate
Drain whey
Drain whey Churn Stir
Coat pieces
in sugar
Fresh and
stored Chhana
Mix with
sugar Heat
clarify
Concentrate,
freeze
Concentrate,
add sugar
Mix with
weat ﬂour,
deep fry
Boll portions
in sugar
Concentrate Concentrate,
partially heat,
clot, add sugar Concentrate
Seve in 
sugar syrup
Seve in 
condensed 
milk
Mix with
weat ﬂour,
deep fry
Heat, mix
with sugar
1:2 1:2
1:4 1:5
Source: F AO. 1990. The technology of traditional milk products in developing countries. 
Animal Health and Production Paper No 85. Rome.
24
ﬁred driers, etc. can be used. Flavour 
can be added to dry meat by the use 
of salt and spices. 
 Smoking is less satisfactory as a 
preservative method: light smoking 
delays the onset of spoilage by a 
relatively short period, whereas 
heavy smoking, although more 
satisfactory in terms of preservation, 
can have severe negative effects 
on the ﬂavour and nutritional value 
of the ﬁnal product. Consequently, 
smoking is often regarded as an 
emergency measure and other 
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
25
traditional methods of preservation 
are generally preferred. Modern 
methods of meat preservation include 
the use of refrigeration, for chilling 
and freezing, and canning.
 Milk may be processed into a range 
of products such as cheese, yoghurt, 
butter and ghee. In some countries a 
multiplicity of products is made from 
raw milk (see Figure 10). There is 
considerable indigenous knowledge 
about such processes, many of 
which are commonly carried out at 
household level. Such activities are 
valuable and can lead to the creation 
of products that can be marketed over 
a much wider distance.
  Adding value to non-food 
products can take many forms such 
as the production of handicrafts, for 
example: wool may be washed, spun 
and made into yarns or cloths; animal 
skins may be cured and made into 
clothes, belts, bags, shoes, carpets 
etc.; and animal by-products can 
be made into candles and soap. If 
possible, priority should be placed 
on empowering households to add 
value and market their own produce. 
The equipment used should be 
carefully considered, appropriately 
selected, and suitable for use by 
poor households with limited levels 
of education. Further details about 
the production of hides and skins is 
available in the FAO Diversiﬁcation 
booklet No. 8.

FIGURE 11 Rural woman recieving advice on sheep fattening in Senegal
(Photo: © F AO/22177/A. Casset)
27
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
Support services
for small ruminant production
 Sustainable services for all
Small stock farmers need access 
to a range of inputs and marketing 
services. When such services are 
planned, their long-term delivery and 
sustainability must be considered. 
A major aspect of sustainability is 
the involvement of smallholders, 
particularly women, in planning and 
managing the services. 
 In the past the general situation 
of extension and farmer support has 
been a broad sweep rather than a 
targeted promotion of interventions 
for particular groups. Livestock 
producers have usually had less 
support than crop producers and 
women are often neglected even 
though it is frequently recognised 
that they are extremely important to 
the agricultural sector and thus the 
national economy of many countries. 
The situation has changed in recent 
years in some areas (see Figure 11) 
CASE STUDY 5  Services for women livestock keepers in The Gambia
Women are extremely important in the socio-economic development of The Gambia. 
In addition to being the principal managers and decision-makers in sheep and goat 
husbandry, women contribute to the production of swamp and tidal rice, horticultural 
crops and sesame. 
In the past, women have lacked access to credit facilities, inputs for their farming 
practices including land, and, caused by the high illiteracy rate, access to extension 
information. One major limitation to improving the income from small livestock was the 
difﬁculty women faced in marketing their products outside their village environment. 
This approach has resulted in positive beneﬁts for women livestock keepers. They have 
responded well to extension messages and have set up several organizations for their 
mutual beneﬁt. Women extension ofﬁcers have helped to deliver acceptable extension 
messages. Visits to similar farms in neighbouring areas have been productive and clearly 
demonstrated the value of farmer-to-farmer extension. The integration of extension 
activities with other rural services, such as combining the use of critical inputs with access 
to credit, were found to be a major component of success. The use of village demonstration 
sites encouraged the introduction and widespread dissemination of new techniques.
Recent developments in tackling the issue of service provision
to women livestock producers have included: 
 • the development of appropriate extension materials;
 • the establishment of demonstration sites;
 • the use of local extension worker-to-farmer contacts;
 • the promotion of farmer-to-farmer dissemination;
 • experience and observational learning;
 • a limited number of vaccination interventions.
28
and special services are now being 
provided for women producers (see 
Case Study 5).
 One of the greatest deterrents to the 
growth of small stock production is the 
spread of animal diseases that result in 
a loss of production. The provision of 
resources to overcome this is essential 
through supplying appropriate breeds 
of livestock including exotic or cross 
breeds (see Case Study 6), improving 
levels of feeding, and ensuring timely 
and focussed veterinary prophylaxis 
or treatment. 
 Once these aspects of livestock 
keeping have been addressed, other 
weaknesses in the sector may become 
apparent such as poor marketing and 
pricing arrangements, or the lack of 
indigenous knowledge. These issues 
CASE STUDY 6  Appropriate goat breeds in Tanzania
Sarah is the chairwoman of a women’s group in Babati, Tanzania, and a member 
of the Toggenburg Breeders’ Association, which FARM-Africa assists with training 
and marketing. She lives with her husband, children and grandchildren. Sarah 
started keeping goats in 1991 and has sold eleven cross-breeds. She is immensely 
proud of her goats and of her status as the ﬁrst woman in the area to receive the 
new breed. 
“Before, my children were under-nourished, but now they are healthy and 
happy because of the milk. Money from the goats enabled my eldest daughter 
to go to secondary school and now she is a teacher working for the government. 
Any extra income we get from the goats pays for schooling.”
Sarah has one Toggenburg buck and four does. They are housed in a shed with a 
tin roof to keep out the wild animals that live in the nearby mountains. Brick walls 
ensure that the animals keep warm during the colder nights. 
The women’s group will soon establish a credit scheme. All members will put in 
a small amount of money and give out loans for further goat-keeping activities, 
thereby enabling more families to beneﬁt from the project. Sarah is certain of the 
difference that the animals have made to her life as she looks around her, at her 
thriving children and grandchildren. “The goats have made my life very happy,” 
she says.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
29
may, however, be addressed more 
easily once animal health constraints 
have been overcome or reduced to an 
acceptable level.
 Access to technical and
 commercial information, 
 loans and credit
Small ruminant producers differ in 
many ways from keepers of intensive 
livestock or large stock. Because 
their enterprises are small, they are 
not very visible and their needs are 
often overlooked or underestimated. 
Many small stock keepers are 
women and children who are usually 
excluded from the regular channels 
of communication. Consequently, 
sheep and goat keepers may ﬁnd it 
difﬁcult to gain access to technical 
information concerning livestock, 
livestock services, loans, credit 
facilities, savings mechanisms and 
marketing possibilities. As a result, 
the likelihood of making a success 
of their enterprise and achieving the 
potential beneﬁts of their stock may 
be limited. 
30
 In view of the large number of 
small ruminants in many countries 
and their potential contribution to 
the local and national economy, 
it is essential that policy-makers 
address the issues that prevent access 
to such services by small stock 
keepers. It may be necessary to make 
special provision for the delivery of 
appropriate services designed for 
the different needs of small-scale 
livestock keepers. 
 The provision of services, credit 
and physical inputs must be sensitive 
to labour division between women 
and men in livestock production. 
Particular attention should be paid to 
the ability of women to access such 
services and steps taken to overcome 
any barriers they may face.
 Veterinary services
Each species of small ruminant,  
country or region has its own set of 
prevalent animal diseases. Whatever 
the disease, it must be handled in a 
cost effective way in order to create 
the framework in which successful 
livestock keeping can ﬂourish. This 
may involve a combination of national 
veterinary services, particularly for 
diseases that need a national or even 
a transnational eradication policy (for 
example, Rift Valley Fever and Peste 
des Petit Ruminants - also known 
as goat plague) coupled with locally 
delivered interventions. 
 There are many alternative forms 
of delivering veterinary services. The 
traditional approach of government 
veterinary service, comprising a top-
down structure of regional and district 
ofﬁces, has generally been unable to 
deliver services to local farmers as a 
result of a combination of inadequate 
funding, poor motivation amongst 
staff, and a failure of trust between 
farmer and veterinarian. More 
successful health delivery strategies 
have involved the private sector, the 
use of para-vets, community animal 
health workers and pharmacy-based 
services. 
 There is no one size ﬁts all 
solution. Governments need to 
examine the question of how best 
to deliver veterinary services to 
smallholders and should not assume 
that the historical top-down approach 
is either the best or the only way. 
The discussion often centres on 
the provision of such services by 
public or private services or by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) 
and whether farmers should pay 
directly for these services. 
 The main need is often simple 
prophylaxis programmes that can 
be taught and delivered at the local 
level. More specialized veterinary 
knowledge may be needed in only 
a small number of cases. In each 
locality it should be possible to 
determine what are the most likely 
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
31
disease threats and train farmers and 
para-vets to deal with them. In view 
of the close involvement of women 
and of children in the management of 
small ruminants, policy-makers and 
extension managers should ensure 
that they are provided with training in 
primary animal health care.
 Access to technologies 
 and training
Factors to be considered when 
determining training needs of small-
scale livestock keepers includes 
whether livestock keeping is a 
traditional enterprise or has been 
introduced recently, the choice of 
animal species, the use of indigenous 
and modern technologies, whether 
farmers are settled or migrants, the 
effects of social changes and new 
work patterns, market opportunities 
for livestock products, and the wider 
issues of community decision-making 
and community well-being. 
 Indigenous knowledge should be 
harnessed wherever it can be found. 
However, with newer techniques, 
particularly those associated with 
processing and marketing livestock 
and their products, training will be 
important to the success of such 
activities. This may take the form 
of training in techniques suitable for 
small-scale household use or suitable 
for somewhat larger but still local 
processing plants. 
 Training may be delivered by 
central or local government agencies, 
NGOs, private organizations or 
farmers’ groups. The scale and nature 
of small farm production means that 
training is more likely to be delivered 
in a cost effective manner, if it is 
delivered face-to-face at community 
level or remotely by radio or 
television. The design of the training 
programmes and identiﬁcation of 
potential trainees should take account 
of the gender roles in livestock 
production. For example, if women 
are involved in household processing 
and marketing of small ruminants and 
their products, much of the training 
could be targeted at women’s groups. 
Skills development plays a crucial 
role in the empowerment process.
 Input supply chains
Many options for processing livestock 
products require the provision of 
specialized equipment or inputs 
including fresh water, packaging, 
dyes and other chemicals. Supply 
mechanisms and the availability of 
local products are critical for the 
sustainability of this process.
 Markets for produce
Much of the output from small-scale 
livestock production is consumed 
in the home or sold or bartered with 
friends and neighbours. Encouraging 
and supporting smallholder access 
32
to more formal markets is an 
additional means of generating cash 
and providing a wider outlet for 
surplus produce. Products need to 
be marketed in a reliable and cost-
effective way. Assistance may take 
the form of market information about 
market opportunities, prices and 
quality requirements; transaction 
mechanisms between farmers and 
buyers; transport to more distant 
markets; transporting goods to market 
in smaller or larger lots; product 
advertising; the use of middlemen, 
the creation of local markets; and the 
provision of information to potential 
buyers about the existence of markets.
 The creation of specialized 
markets, the use of agricultural shows, 
the setting up of food fairs, as well as 
the more traditional food markets, are 
possible outlets for surplus produce. 
More innovative methods to supply 
processing factories with bulk produce 
may be an option worth pursuing for 
farmer groups. A major factor for a 
successful operation of this kind is 
that as much control of the marketing 
process as possible remains in the 
hands of local livestock keepers.
 Transport
Transport could be a key factor in the 
success of realizing the potential of 
sheep and goat resources. This relates 
to transporting the inputs required for 
processing livestock products as well 
as transporting the ﬁnal products to 
a distant market or outlet. Existing 
local transport arrangements may 
be adequate or adaptable to the 
marketing needs of small farmers. 
However, there could be special 
needs for perishable food products 
including refrigerated containers for 
milk or meat. Investment in such 
facilities is critical to the success 
of the small stock keeper and must 
be considered in relation to the 
throughput and sustainability of the 
marketing operation.
 Potential for establishing 
 cooperatives and women’s
 groups
Livestock producer cooperatives 
and women’s groups can provide 
a range of beneﬁts to members 
including delivering technological 
messages, sharing best practices, 
joint purchasing of inputs, collective 
value-adding activities, product 
differentiation through labelling, risk 
reduction, securing higher prices and 
economies of scale through collective 
marketing, and providing access to 
credit and savings mechanisms.
 Food safety regulations
In many parts of the world, the 
commercialization of small animal 
products, such as milk and meat, 
are becoming subject to food safety 
regulations which require approved 
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
33
facilities for processing, such as 
pasteurisation plants or licensed 
slaughterhouses. As consumers 
become increasingly focused on 
quality and safety attributes, it is 
expected that regulatory frameworks 
will become more widespread, more 
stringent and have to be applied more 
frequently and more rigorously. 
 Under such a scenario, small 
livestock keepers wishing to market 
their products must be informed 
of the food safety legislation that 
may affect their activities. The 
national body responsible for food 
safety is responsible for setting 
such regulations, generally based on 
Codex Alimentarius standards, and 
it also controls their implementation 
and should give such information to 
farmers and processors.

35
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
There are four main technical 
constraints which work against 
successful improvements and 
sustainability in small ruminant 
production and productivity:
• the genetic potential of 
indigenous livestock in need  
of improvement;
• the widespread distribution  
of livestock diseases;
• inadequate feed supplies and  
poor animal nutrition; 
• poor marketing infrastructure  
and arrangements.
Non-technical constraints, such 
as the balance of operations and 
management between central and 
local governments, an almost 
universal absence of clear livestock 
development policies and strategies, 
the pace of privatization and the 
possibilities of cost recovery for 
goods and services, are also important 
factors constraining the development 
possibilities for sheep and goats.
 
Further disincentives to rapid 
development include a lack of 
rural services and infrastructure, a 
credit environment unsympathetic 
to smallholder borrowers, weak 
ﬁnancial services, and unclear 
land tenure policies. Once external 
funding is withdrawn, the continuity 
and sustainability of projects  is often 
frustrated by absence of government 
support and little beneﬁciary 
participation in the concept, design 
and implementation of development 
initiatives. Capital investment and the 
provision of recurrent expenditure for 
livestock development are very often 
low, particularly in relation to the size 
and importance of small ruminant 
populations. In many countries, 
government support has actually 
decreased in absolute and relative 
terms over recent years.  Increasing 
population pressure, uncertain 
rainfall, declining soil fertility, and 
traditional techniques continue to 
inhibit increases in animal output.
 Consequently, despite the large 
number of small ruminants in the 
developing world, almost nowhere 
do they produce to their potential.  
Nevertheless, small ruminants do 
make a substantial direct contribution 
to national and household economies, 
and to food security. High value 
essential dietary proteins for people 
Challenges and opportunities
36
are an important output of small 
ruminants.  There is rapidly rising 
demand for livestock products 
especially from the urban populations 
that are escalating throughout the 
world. For small stock keepers in 
developing countries, there are 
speciﬁc markets for higher output of 
food products deriving from domestic 
animals in areas where the demand 
is greatest, the cost of production is 
lowest, and the potential for adding 
value is most favourable. Increased 
and more efﬁcient production is 
therefore very important to overall 
development.  
 Small ruminants provide a very 
suitable base for increasing the supply 
of animal products. Comprehensive 
and coherent programmes for 
development of small ruminant 
production would seem to be the 
most appropriate way to confront the 
complex biological, technical and 
climatic factors, and associated policy 
issues with which these extremely 
useful animals have to contend. 
 There is also the possibility of 
improving the genetic potential of 
indigenous livestock for the increased 
and more efﬁcient production of 
milk, meat, wool and skins. These 
are areas where, given an appropriate 
enabling environment, there is likely 
to be increased producer interest. 
Current economic policies in many 
countries now allow for much greater 
private involvement in agriculture in 
general. There has been a rather slow 
private sector response to agricultural 
and especially livestock investment, 
because there are alternative attractive 
short-term opportunities in other 
sectors (especially transport, tourism 
and construction).
 The challenges to guaranteeing 
food security and alleviating poverty 
require sustained increases in 
production and productivity. Farmers 
will respond to appropriate incentives, 
better market access and technology 
transfer. The possibilities of enhancing 
farm incomes from a high value 
product should not be overlooked.
 Strategic options to improve small 
ruminant production include:
• prioritizing the development of 
the small-scale and traditional 
sector;
• continuing to re-orient the role  
of governments in creating an 
appropriate enabling environment;
• making more appropriate 
production technology available 
through research and extension;
• continued investment in human 
resources development, especially 
farmers; 
• improving resource management 
by smallholder farmers; 
• increasing beneficiary 
participation in ef
forts and 
rewards.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
37
Selected further reading 
Charray, J. 1992. Manual of sheep production in the humid tropics of Africa. 
CAB International, Wallingford.
Coop, I. E. 1982. Sheep and goat production, Elsevier, Oxford.
Devendra, C & Burns, M. 1983. Goat production in the tropics, 
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau, Slough.
Devendra, C. & McLeroy, G. B. 1982. Goat and sheep pr oduction in the 
tropics, Longmans, Harlow.
FAO. 2008. Rural transport and traction enterprises for improved livelihoods 
and income, by P. Crossley & T. Chamen, FAO Diversification booklet 
No.10, Rome. 
FAO. 2007. A guide to marketing costs and how to calculate them, by A.W. 
Shepherd, FAO Marketing Extension Guides, Rome.
FAO. 2005. Talking about money, by J.Heney, Rome.
FAO. 2004. Processed foods for improved livelihoods, by P. Fellows, FAO 
Diversification booklet No. 5, Rome. 
FAO. 2002. Milk producer group resource book, a practical guide to assist 
milk pr
oducer groups, by J. Draajer, Rome.
FAO. 2000a. Understanding and using market information, by A.W. 
Shepherd, FAO Marketing Extension Guide No. 2, Rome.
FAO. 2000b.Enahncing farmers’ financial management skills, by J.Heney, 
Agricultural Finance Revisited No. 6, Rome.
38
FAO. 1997a. Agricultural and food marketing management, by I.M. 
Crawford, AGS Marketing and Agribusiness Text V ol. 2, Rome.
FAO. 1997b. Marketing research and information systems, by I.M. Crawford, 
AGS Marketing and Agribusiness Text V ol. 4, Rome.
FAO. 1995a. The Group enterprise book, Rome.
FAO. 1995b. Harvesting of textile animal fibres, by O.J. Petrie, Agricultural 
Services Bulletin No 122, Rome.
FAO. 
1994a. The group promoter’ s resource book, Rome.
FAO. 1994b. Management of rural income-generating activities, 
Rome.
FAO. 1994c.Simple bookkeeping and business management skills, by 
R. Meijernik, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Sustainable animal production from small farm systems in 
Southeast Asia, by C. Devendra, Animal Production and Health Paper No. 
106, Rome.
FAO. 1992a. Meat and meat products in human nutrition in developing 
countries, by A. Bender, Food and Nutrition Paper No 53, Rome.
FAO. 1992b. Sustainable livestock production in the mountain agro-
ecosystem of Nepal, Animal Production and Health Paper No. 105, Rome.
FAO. 1991. Small ruminant production and the small ruminant genetic 
resource in tropical Africa, by R.T. Wilson, Animal Production and Health 
Paper No. 88, Rome.
FAO. 1990a. The technology of traditional milk products in developing 
countries, Animal Health and Production Paper No. 85, Rome.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
39
FAO. 1990b. Strategies for sustainable animal agriculture in developing 
countries, Animal Production and Health Paper No. 107, Rome.
FAO. 1989a. Sheep and goat meat production in the humid tropics of West 
Africa, Animal Production and Health Paper No. 70, Rome.
FAO. 1989b. Small ruminants in the Near East and North Africa. V ol. 3, 
Animal Production and Health Paper No. 74, Rome.
FAO. 1988. The development of village-based sheep production in West 
Africa, Training manual for extension workers, Rome.
FAO. 1986. Small ruminant production in the developing countries, Animal 
Production and Health Paper No. 58, Rome.
FAO. 1985. Manual for the slaughtering of small ruminants in developing 
countries, by J.A. Clottey, Animal Production and Health Paper No. 49, 
Rome.
FAO. 1983a.Solar energy in small-scale milk collection and processing. 
by W.B.Tuszyski,  E.A.A.Diakowska  & N.S. Hall, Animal Health and 
Production Paper No 39,  Rome.
FAO. 1983. Intensive sheep production in the Near East, by S. Economides, 
Animal Production and Health Paper No. 40, Rome.
Gatenby, R. M. 1991. Sheep, The Tropical Agriculturalist Series, Macmillan, 
London.
ILO. 2000. Rapid market appraisal, ILO, Geneva.
ILRI. 1995. Small ruminant production techniques, by H. Ibrahim, ILRI 
training manual 3, Nairobi.
ILRI. 1993. Traditional cheese making, Addis Ababa.
40
Jansen, C. 2004. Goat keeping in the tropics, Agrodok 7, CTA, Wageningen.
Kolff, H. E. & Wilson, R. T. 1985. Livestock production in central Mali: 
The “Mouton de Case” system of smallholder sheep fattening.  Agricultural 
Systems 16: 217-230.
Koopmans, R. 2006. Starting a cooperative: farmer controlled economic 
initiatives, Agrodok 38, CTA, Wageningen.
Peacock, C. 1996. Improving goat production in the tropics: a manual for 
development workers, Oxfam, London.
Renard, C. 1997. Crop residues in sustainable mixed crop/livestock farming 
systems, CAB International, Wallingford.
Steele, M. 1996. Goats, The Tropical Agriculturalist Series, Macmillan, 
London.
Van der Westhuysen, J.M. 1982.  Mohair as a textile fibre, proceedings of 
the Third International Conference on Goat Production and Disease,  
pp. 264-267. University of Arizona, Tucson.
Wilson, R.T., Murayi, Th. & Rocha, A. 1989. Indigenous African small 
ruminant strains with potentially high reproductive performance, Small 
Ruminant Research 2: 107-144.
Sheep and goats for diverse products and proﬁts
41
Central Institute for Research on Goats
Makhdoom
P.O. Farah
Mathura 281122
Uttar Pradesh
India
Tel: +91 565 763325 
Fax: +912 565 763246
root@cirg.up.nic.in 
http://www
.cirg.res.in 
Central Sheep and 
Wool Research Institute
Avikanagar
Rajasthan
India
http://www.cswri.raj.nic.in
Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria (EMBRAP A)
Parqe Estacao Biologica
Brasilia Df
Brasil CEP 70770 901
Tel: +61 3448 4433
Fax: +61 3447 1041
http://www.embrapa.br
Sources of further information 
and support
42
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Animal Production and Health Division
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome
Italy
Tel: +39 06 5797
Fax: +39 06 57053152
http://www.fao.org/ag/aga/index_en.htm
FAO/WHO Food Standards CODEX Alimentarius 
http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/
International Goat Association
1015 Louisiana Street
Little Rock
AR 72202
USA
T
el: +1 501 907 2606
goats@heifer.org
http://www
.iga-goatworld.org 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) 
Old Naivasha Road 
P
.O. Box 30709 
Nairobi 00100, Kenya 
Tel: +254-2 630743 
Fax: +254-2 631499
http://www.cgiar.org/ilri/
NetVet Veterinary Resources, The Electronic Zoo
http://netvet.wustl.edu/
Notes
Notes
SMALL RUMINANTS, SUCH AS SHEEP AND GOATS, FIT WELL INTO 
SMALLHOLDER FARMING SYSTEMS. Their grazing preferences 
enable them to feed on weeds, shrubs and other plants that 
other species of domestic animals tend to refuse. Their small size 
means they require less space than larger animals and they are 
less likely to damage and compact soils. They are easier to work 
with than large ruminants and are cheaper to buy and maintain. 
Moreover, under the right conditions, they can be quite proliﬁ c. 
The range of products produced by small ruminants is easy to 
market because demand is high yet largely unfulﬁ lled. Hence 
there are considerable opportunities for smallholders to use such 
animals more effectively and efﬁ ciently and thus increase their 
contribution to livelihoods.
Sheep and goats are widely distributed throughout the world, 
but policy-makers and administrators tend to overlook their 
contributions to the economy, rural and peri-urban livelihoods, 
the empowerment of women, other marginalized groups and 
food security.
Photo: © FAO/17197/G. Bizzarri