# A Review of Cassava in Africa, with Country Case Studies on Nigeria, Ghana, Tanzania, Uganda and Benin
# publisher: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
# year: 2005
# url: https://openknowledge.fao.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/55ef08b3-f4ff-4acc-9b37-7c2b1391ab76/content
# attribution: FAO, A Review of Cassava in Africa — Ghana country case study (2005)
# ghana_specific: True
# extent: 66 pages
# CAVEAT: Contains a dedicated Ghana chapter — that is the part worth retrieving. The rest is other countries and should not be presented as Ghanaian.
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE VALIDATION FORUM 
ON THE GLOBAL CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 
Volume 2 
 
A review of cassava in Africa 
with country case studies on Nigeria, Ghana, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Uganda and Benin 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
Rome, 2005 
 
The designations employed and the presentation of 
material in this information product do not imply the 
expression of any opinion what soever on the part of the 
Food and Agriculture Organiza tion of the United Nations 
or of the International Fund for Agricultural Development 
concerning the legal or development status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
 
 
All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in 
this information product for educational or other non-commercial 
purposes are authorized without any prior written permission from 
the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. 
Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or 
other commercial purposes is prohibited without written 
permission of the copyright hol ders. Applications for such 
permission should be addressed to the Chief, Publishing 
Management Service, Informa tion Division, FAO, Viale delle 
Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, It aly or by e-mail to copyright 
@fao.org 
© FAO and IFAD 2005 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION IN AFRICA 
1.   INTRODUCTION 
2.   THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION 
3.   PRODUCTION TRENDS 
4.   CASSAVA PROCESSING 
5.   CASSAVA CONSUMPTION 
6.   NEW USES FOR CASSAVA 
7. IMPLICATIONS OF THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION FOR 
ENVIRONMENT, GENDER, POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 
8.   CHALLENGES AND STRATEGIES FOR DEVELOPMENT 
CASSAVA IN AFRICA: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 
1.   INTRODUCTION 
2.   THE CASSAVA SYSTEM 
3.   CASSAVA PRODUCTION TRENDS 
4.   CASSAVA AS A FOOD SECURITY CROP 
5.   ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECT OF CASSAVA 
6.   INFRASTRUCTURE AND PRODUCT MARKETS 
7.   RESEARCH AND EXTENSION 
8.   CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE NEEDS 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT IN NIGERIA 
1.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
2.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
3.   INTRODUCTION 
4.   CASSAVA PRODUCTION IN NIGERIA 
5.   CASSAVA UTILIZATION IN NIGERIA 
6.   INTERVENTIONS 
7.   SUCCESSES, FAILURES AND LIMITATIONS OF INTERVENTIONS 
8.   LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST EXPERIENCES: FUTURE STRATEGIES 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT IN GHANA 
1.   FOREWORD 
2.   TERMS OF REFERENCE 
3.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
4.   EVOLUTION OF CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT IN GHANA 
5.   EVALUATION OF INTERVENTIONS 
6.   LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST EXPERIENCES 
7.  A SYNTHESIS OF THE IMPLICATIONS FOR A FUTURE STRATEGY FOR 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT IN GHANA 
STATUS OF CASSAVA IN TANZANIA 
1.   FOREWORD 
2.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
3.   INTRODUCTION 
4.   CASSAVA PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION IN TANZANIA 
5.   INTERVENTIONS 
6.   GENDER ROLES IN CASSAVA PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION 
7.   CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF SUCCESSES AND FAILURES 
8.   LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST EXPERIENCES AND FUTURE 
STRATEGIES 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA 
1.   INTRODUCTION 
2.   BACKGROUND TO THE STUDY 
3.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
4.   UGANDA 
5.   PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION OF CASSAVA IN UGANDA 
6.   FACTORS THAT HAVE INFLUENCED DEVELOPMENT OF CASSAVA IN 
UGANDA 
7.   INTERVENTIONS THAT HAVE INFLUENCED CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT 
8.   SUCCESSES, FAILURES AND LIMITATIONS OF INTERVENTIONS 
9.   LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST EXPERIENCES AND STRATEGIES FOR 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT 
ORGANISATION DE LA FILIÈRE DU MANIOC AU BÈNIN (l
ére PARTIE) 
1.   PRÉAMBULE 
2.   INTRODUCTION 
3.   SITUATION ACTUELLE DU MANIOC AU BÉNIN 
4.   STRATEGIES POUR LA PROMOTION DE LA FILIÈRE DU MANIOC 
5.   MO YENS ÀMETTRE EN OEUVRE 
ORGANISATION DE LA FILIÈRE DU MANIOC AU BENIN (2
ème PARTIE) 
1.   INTRODUCTION 
2.   JUSTIFICATION 
3.   OBJECTIFS DU PROJET 
4.   COMPOSANTS DU PROJET 
5.   CONCLUSIONS ET RECOMMENDATIONS 
ORGANISATION DE LA FILIÈRE DU MANIOC AU BENIN (3ème PARTIE) 
1.   DURÉE DU PROJET 
2.   CONCLUSIONS 
REPORT OF THE BRAINSTORMING SESSION WITH AFRICAN 
RESEARCHERS ON THE GLOBAL CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 
1.   BACKGROUND 
2.   THE STRATEGY 
3.   APPLICABILITY OF GCDS TO AFRICA 
4.   A CONCENSUS 
5.   KEY ISSUES RAISED 
6.   PRIORITY ISSUES FOR INTERVENTION OF CASSAVA 
7.   ACTION AREAS 
REPORT OF THE REGIONAL STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATION MEETING 
FOR WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICA ON THE GLOBAL CASSAVA 
STRATEGY 
1.   SUMMARY 
2.   BACKGROUND 
3.   REGIONAL STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTATION MEETING 
4.   CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
PROGRESS REVIEW MEETING ON TH E FORMULATION OF THE GLOBAL 
CASSAVA DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 
PREFACE 
Cassava was first introduced to the Africa continent, close to the mouth of the Congo 
River by Portuguese explorers a nd traders from Brazil, South America in the course of 
the 16th and 17 th centuries. From there it was diffuse d by Africans, to many parts of sub-
Saharan Africa over a period of two to three hundr ed years. In the course of its spreading 
across the continent, cassava has replaced trad itional staples such as millet and yam, and 
has been successfully incorporated into many farming systems. It was initially adopted as 
a famine reserve crop as it provided a more reliable source of food during drought, locust 
attacks and the hungry season, the period before seasonal food crops are ready for 
harvesting. 
At present, approximately half of the world production of cassava is in Africa where it is 
cultivated in around 40 countries, stretching th rough a wide belt from Madagascar in the 
southeast to Senegal and Cape Verde in the northwest. Approximately 75 percent of 
Africa's cassava output is harvested in Ni geria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Ghana, Tanzania and Mozambique. Cassava is grown by millions of poor African 
farmers, many of them women, often on marginal land. For these people, the crop is vital 
for both food security and income generation. 
On the basis of current projections, it is expected that by 2020, over 60 percent of global 
cassava production will be in sub-Saharan Af rica, where economic growth will be slow 
but population growth fast. Cassava, theref ore, will be a favoured source of cheap 
carbohydrates in the countryside and will also continue to serve as a food security crop. 
Furthermore, as urbanization continues in th e continent, more people in cities and towns 
will purchase their food rather than grow it th emselves. This will continue to give small 
farmers a source of cash income from cassava ; some of it will reach  the market in a 
processed form. The resulting gain in povert y reduction and greater food security will 
depend in part on an integrated set of re search and development outputs that include 
higher-yielding, pest-resistant varieties; improved crop management and integrated 
protection measures as well as processing equipment and procedures; better linkages 
among producers, processors, and consumers through capacity-building in market 
analysis and enterprise development; and improved policies that facilitate the 
development and adoption of these innovations. 
The vision for cassava in Africa is that if  the cassava food system is improved, it will 
enhance rural industrial development and raise incomes for producers, processors and 
traders. Cassava will contribute more to th e food security status of its producing and 
consuming households, and will become an even more important cash crop that can 
promote rural development. 
To achieve this vision, the Global Cassava Development Strategy was formulated with 
the participation of a large number of st akeholders and with support from FAO and 
IFAD. The essence of the Strategy is to use a demand/market-driven and commodity 
chain approach to promote and develop cassava -based industries with the assistance of a 
coalition of stakeholders including cassava producers and their organizations, 
governments and policy-makers, donors, techni cal and research institutions and their 
networks, NGOs and the private sector. Th e Strategy recognizes the need to support 
NEPAD's Pan-African Initiative, which is in support of the existing National and 
“Presidential” Initiatives, and public-private partnerships and multidonors' programmes 
on cassava in sub-Saharan Africa. 
As a contribution to the development of the Global Cassava Strategy, IFAD's generous 
financial assistance supported the preparation of the Africa Regional Review on Cassava, 
the Country Case Studies on Nigeria, Ghan a, Tanzania, Uganda and Bening, and the 
Report of the Africa Consultations on the Global Cassava Development Strategy. These 
were presented at the Validation Forum that  was jointly organized by FAO and IFAD in 
FAO headquarters, Rome, April 2000. 
The Crop and Grassland Service of the F AO Plant Production and Protection Division 
has compiled these documents and is now pleased to publish the Proceedings in order to 
disseminate the information to stakeholders , cassava producers and their organizations, 
governments and policy-makers, donors, techni cal and research institutions and their 
networks, NGOs and their networks, the private sector - as well as to scholars, experts 
and interested individuals. 
It is hoped that this information will help  to strengthen institutional and technical 
capacity in support of sustainable developm ent and management of the cassava sub-
sector, and value-added agro-enterprise enhan cement, in order to contribute to increased 
food availability, poverty reduction, employment, better economic opportunities and 
wealth creation for improved livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable population of Africa. 
 
Mahmoud B. Solh 
Director 
Plant Production and Protection Division 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The FAO Crop and Grassland Service would lik e to acknowledge the contribution of the 
following authors: Felix Nweke for the pa per on cassava transformation in Africa; 
Dunstan Spencer and associates for the ca ssava overview on Africa; Adeoye Adeniji, 
Lawrence Ega, Malachy Akoroda, A.A. Aden iyi and Boniface Ugwu for the case study 
on Nigeria; Francis Ofori, E.V. Doku, Rama natu Al-Hassan, J.J. Afuakwa, D. Pessey, 
R.K. Noamesi and W. Amoa-Amwuah for the case study on Ghana; Regina Kapinga, 
January Mafuru, Simon Jeremiah, Elizabeth Rwiza, Ruth Kamala, Fredrick Mashamba 
and Nicholas Mlingi for the case study on Ta nzania; G.W. Otim-Nape, A. Bua, G. 
Ssemakula, G. Acola, Y. Baguma, S. Ogwa l and R. Van der Grift for the case study on 
Uganda and N. Maroya, G. Houngni bo, C. Medenou, A. Lagbadohossou, S.F. 
Djogbenou, B. Soude and J. Monhouanou for the case study on Benin. 
Felix Nweke, Adeoye Adeniji, Lawrence Ega, Boniface Ugwu, Malachy Akoroda, 
Francis Ofori, Regina Kapinga, January Ma furu, Simon Jeremiah, Elizabeth Rwiza, 
Otim-Nape, Anton Bua, Norbert Maroya a nd Adrianna Gabrielli are thanked for editing 
and Rita Ashton for preparing the camera-ready text. 
Special acknowledgements are due to NeBamb i Lutaladio (Agricultural Officer, Crop 
and Grassland Service, FAO) who has patie ntly coordinated, guided and made possible 
the release of this publication within the framework of the Global Cassava Development 
Strategy. 
 
Eric A. Kueneman 
Chief 
Crop and Grassland Service 
FAO Plant Production and Protection Division 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS 
Acola, G. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Adeniji, A.A. Federal Department of Agriculture, Ijebu-Ife, Nigeria 
Adeniyi, A.A. Federal Agricultural Coordinating Unit, Abuja, Nigeria 
Afuakwa, J.J. Crop Research Institute, Kumasi, Ghana 
Akoroda, M.O. University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria 
Al-Hassan, R. University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana 
Amoa-Awuah, W. Food Research Institute, Accra, Ghana 
Baguma, Y. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Balogun, de A. Ogun State Agricultural De velopment Project, Abeokuta, Nigeria 
Bua, A. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Djogbenou, S.F. Direction de l'agriculture, Cotonou, Bénin 
Doku, E.V. University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana 
Ega, L.A. Benue State University, Makurdi, Nigeria 
Houngnibo, G. Centre d'actions rurales pour le développement régional, Ouémé, 
Bénin 
Jeremiah, S. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Kamala, R. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Kapinga, R. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Lagbadohossou, 
A. 
Ministère du développement rural, Cotonou, Bénin 
Mafuru, J. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Maroya, N. Institut national des recherches agricoles du Bénin, Cotonou, Bénin, 
Mashamba, F. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Medenou, C. Minister du développement rural, Cotonou, Bénin 
Mlingi, N. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Monhouanou, J. Institut national des recherches agricoles du Bénin, Niaouli, Bénin 
Noamesi, R.k. Glucosett GhanaLtd., Accra, Ghana 
Nweke, F.I. Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA 
Ofori, F. Crop Services, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Accra, Ghana 
Ogwal, S. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Otim-Nape, G.W. Namulon
ge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Pessey, D. Transport and commodity General, Donkokrom, Ghana 
Rwiza, E. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Tanzania 
Ssemakula, G. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
Soude, B. Programme d'interventions locales pour la sécuritéalimentaire, Bénin
Spencer, D.S.C. Dunstan Spencer and Associates, Sierra Leone 
Ugwu, B.O. National Root Crop Research Institute, Umudike, Nigeria 
Van der Grift, R. Namulonge Agricultural and Animal Production Research Institute, 
Uganda 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
ACMD African Cassava Mosaic Disease 
ADP Agricultural Development Project 
AGDIV Agricultural Diversification Project 
AGDP Agricultural Gross Domestic Product 
APMEU Agricultural Projects Monitoring and Evaluation Unit 
ASARECA, Association for Strengthening Agricu ltural Research in Eastern and 
Central Africa 
ASIP Agricultural Sector Investments Project 
BEA Block Extension Agent 
BLP Better Life Programme 
BS Breeder Seeds 
CAD Cassava Anthracnose Disease 
CARDER Centre d'actions rurales pour le développement régional 
CBB Cassava Bacterial Blight 
CEDMA Centre départemental de matériels agricoles 
CENAP Centre National d'Agro Pédologie 
CGIAR Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
CGM Cassava Green Might 
CGSM Cassava Green Spider Mite 
CIAT Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical 
CIRAD Centre de cooperation internationale  en recherche agronomique pour le 
développement 
CM Cassava Mealybug 
CMD Cassava Mosaic Disease 
CMP Cassava Multiplication Project 
CMP-CU Cassava Multiplication Project-Coordinating Unit 
CMVD Cassava Mosaic Virus Disease 
COOPROMA Coopérative des producteurs de Manioc 
CORAF (Conférence des responsables de recherche agronomique africains 
COSCA Collaborative Study on Cassava in Africa 
CPDU Cassava Processing Demonstration Unit 
CRI Crops Research Institute 
CS Certified Seeds 
DAGRI Direction de l'agriculture, Bénin 
DAPS Direction de l'analyse, de la prévision et de la synthèse 
EARRNET Africa Root Crops Research Network 
EPHTA Ecoregional Programme for the Hu mid and Subhumid Tropics of Sub-
Saharan Africa 
ESCaPP Environmentally Sustainable Cassava Plant Protection 
EU European Union 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FDA Federal Department of Agriculture 
FFA Framework for Action 
FGN Federal Government of Nigeria 
FIIRO Federal Institute of Industrial Research, Oshodi, Lagos 
FIIRO Federal Institute of Industrial Research 
FMANR Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
FRI Food Research Institute 
FS Foundation Seeds 
FSA Faculté des Sciences Agronomique 
GCDS Global Cassava Development Strategy 
GS Global Strategy for Cassava Development 
GSM Green Spider Mite 
ha Hectare 
HST Humid and Subhumid Tropics 
IARC International Agricultural Research Centre 
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
IDA International Development Association 
IDESSA Institut des Savannes 
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 
IITA International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 
INRAB Institut national des recherches agricoles du Bénin 
INSAH Institut du Sahel 
IPM Integrated Pest Management 
ISTRC-AB International Society for Tropical Root Crops - Africa Branch 
Kcal Kilocalories 
km Kilometres 
LGA Local Government Areas 
LGB Larger Grain Border 
MDR Ministére du dèveloppement rural, Bénin 
MOFA Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Ghana 
MSADP Multi-State ADP 
MSADP Multi-State Agricultural Development Projects 
MTADP Medium-Term Agricultural Development Programme 
NAEP National agricultural Extension Project 
NAFCON National Fertilizer Company 
NAFPP National Accelerated Food Production Programme 
NARIS National Agricultural Research Institutes 
NARO National Agricultural Research Organization 
NARP National Agricultural Research Project 
NARS National Agricultural Research System 
NCRP Nationally Coordinated Research Programme 
NCWS National Council of Women Societies 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NIYAMCO Nigerian Yeast and Alcohol Manufacturing Company 
NRCRI National Root Crops Research Institute 
NRI National Resources Institute 
NRTCIP National Root and Tuber Crops Improvement project 
NSPRI National Stored Products Research Institute 
NSS National Seed Service 
NTRCIP National Root and Tuber Crops Improvement Project 
OFAR On-Farm Adaptive Research 
OFN Operation Feed the Nation 
ONASA Office National d'Appui à la Sécurité Alimentaire 
ORSTOM Institut de recherches scientifiques pour le développement en coopération 
PADSA Programme d'appui au développement du secteur agricole 
PADSE Projet d'Appui à la diversification des systèmes d'exploitation 
PILSA Programme d'interventions locales pour la sécurité alimentaire, Bénin 
PISEA Projet d'insertion des sans emploi dans l'Agriculture 
PRODA Product Development Agency 
PROMIC Projet de micro-finances et de commercialisation 
PRONAM Programme national du manioc 
RAIDS Rural Agro-Industrial Development Scheme 
REFILS Research-Extension-Farmers-Linkage-System 
RMRDC Raw Materials Research and Development Council 
RRA Rapid Rural Appraisal 
RRPMC Regional Research Project on Maize and Cassava 
SACCAR Southern African Centre for Coopera tion in Agricultural Research and 
Training 
SAP Structural Adjustment Programme 
SARRNET Southern Africa Root Crops Research Network 
SDC Swiss Development Corporation 
SPAT Small Plot Adaptive Trial tonne 
SRDP Smallholder Rehabilitation and Development Programme 
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa 
T&V Training and Visit 
TMS Tropical Manioc Selection 
USS United States dollar 
WATI World Agricultural Trade Indicators 
WIA Women-in-Agriculture 
 
THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION IN AFRICA 
Prepared by 
Felix I. Nweke1 
Michigan State University, USA2 
1/ Formerly, leader of the Collaborative Study of Cassa va in Africa 1989–97, International Institute of Tropical 
Agriculture, Nigeria. 
2/ Visiting Professor, Agric. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In Africa (sub-Saharan Africa), the diffusion of cassava can be described as a self-
spreading innovation. Cassava was introduced into Africa by Portuguese traders from 
Brazil in the 16th century (Okigbo, 1980). It was initially adopted as a famine-reserve 
crop. In the Democratic Republic of Congo (h ereafter referred to as “the Congo”) where 
the crop was first introduced, millet, banana and yam were the traditional staples but 
farmers adopted cassava because it provide d a more reliable source of food during 
drought, locust attack and during the hungry season 1. Although there was some local 
trade in cassava, production was mostly for home consumption and cassava was prepared 
in the simplest fashion, i.e. slicing and boiling (Jones, 1959). 
Currently, about half of the world producti on of cassava is in Africa. Cassava is 
cultivated in around 40 African countries , stretching through a wide belt from 
Madagascar in the Southeast to Senegal a nd to Cape Verde in the Northwest. Around 70 
percent of Africa's cassava output is harvested in Nigeria, the Congo and Tanzania (IFAD 
and FAO, 2000). Throughout the forest and trans ition zones of Africa, cassava is either a 
primary staple or a secondary food staple. 
Africa is a continent in cr isis; it is racked with hunger, poverty and the HIV/AIDS 
pandemic. Africa is also the region with th e fastest population growth, the most fragile 
natural resource base and the weakest set of agricultural research and extension 
institutions. 
The average GNP per capita in Africa in 2000 was US$480 (World Bank, 1999). Civil 
strife and authoritarian regimes have de stabilized many countries. Around three-quarters 
of the poor in Africa are rural people who secure their livelihood from agriculture. 
Africa's population is expected to double to  1.2 billion in 2020; and its urban population 
will grow at a faster rate (McCall, 1999). 
Without question, domestic food production a nd/or food imports will have to be 
increased to meet Africa's growing food de mand. Due to poverty and a lack of foreign 
exchange, Africa's net cereal imports are exp ected to remain low (Pinstrup-Anderson et 
al., 2000). Therefore, the urgent challenge befo re African nations is to increase domestic 
food production. 
Maize is Africa's most important food crop and it is held up as a model food crop to meet 
Africa's growing urban demand for conve nient food products (Mellor et al., 1987, 
Blackie, 1990 and Byerlee and Eicher, 1997) . Maize production however, is risky 
because of unpredictable rainfall. Cassava is  Africa's second most important food staple 
in terms of per capita calories consumed. Cassava is a major source of calories for 
roughly two out of every five Africans. In so me countries, cassava is consumed daily and 
sometimes more than once a day. In the Congo, cassava contributes more than 1 000 
calories per person per day to the averag e diet and many families eat cassava for 
breakfast, lunch and dinner. 
Cassava has the potential to increase farm incomes, reduce rural and urban poverty and 
help close the food gap. Without question, cassava holds great promise for feeding 
Africa's growing population. Cassava can be produced with family labour, land and a hoe 
and machete, making it an attractive and low-ri sk crop for poor farmers. Also, cassava is 
available to low-income rural households in  the form of simple food products (for 
example, dried roots and leaves) which are signi ficantly cheaper than grains such as rice, 
maize and wheat. Similarly, urban households  in many parts of West Africa consume 
cassava in the form of gari2 (Nweke et al., 2001). 
Cassava has several other advantages over rice, maize and other grains as a food staple in 
areas where there is a degraded resource base, uncertain rainfall and weak market 
infrastructure. It is drought tolerant; this attribute makes it the most suitable food crop 
during periods of drought and famine. 
Cassava has historically played an importa nt famine-prevention role in Eastern and 
Southern Africa where maize is the prefe rred food staple and drought is a recurrent 
problem. 
However, cassava has been neglected for numerous reasons by researchers, African 
policy-makers and by most donor and internati onal agencies. Cassava is a marginalized 
crop in food policy debates and burdened with the stigma of being an inferior food, ill 
suited and uncompetitive with the glamour crops such as imported rice and wheat 
because of several long-standing myths a nd half-truths. Many food policy analysts 
consider cassava as an inferior food because it is assumed that its per capita consumption 
will decline with increasing per capita incomes (Nweke et al., 2001). 
Until the late 1980s, information was very scarce on cassava in Africa. However, in 1989, 
a Collaborative Study of Cassava in Africa (COSCA) was initiated by the Rockefeller 
Foundation and based at IITA. During an  eight-year period (1989 to 1997), COSCA 
researchers collected information from 1 686 households in 281 villages in six countries: 
the Congo, Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. 
The goal of the Global Cassava Development Strategy (GCDS) is to analyse cassava 
production and utilization trends; identify constraints and opportunities in the cassava 
sector with emphasis on poverty alleviation, equity, food security and environmental 
protection; and develop a set of priorities fo r future intervention in the cassava sector 
(Spencer and Associates, 1997). This review  is based on information from the six 
COSCA study countries supplemented with secondary data from FAO and various 
information collected from African farmer s, researchers, traders and processors 
throughout Africa from the beginning of the COSCA study in 1989 to 2001. 
This review shows how the planting of ne w Tropical Manioc Selection (TMS) cassava 
varieties developed and released to farm ers in Nigeria in the 1970s by IITA, has 
transformed cassava from a low-yielding famine-reserve crop to a high-yielding cash 
crop. The review also shows that with the ai d of mechanical graters to prepare gari, 
cassava is increasingly being produced and processed as a cash crop for urban 
consumption in Ghana and Nigeria. The next stage in the cassava transformation is from 
a food crop to a raw material for livestock feed and industries in order to raise farm 
income. 
1 The period before seasonal food crops are ready for harvest. 
2 Gari is a granulated and toasted cereal-lik e cassava food product which is convenient 
for consumption in urban environments because it is in a ready-to-eat form and it has an 
extended shelf life. 
2 THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION 
Traditionally, cassava is produced on small-scal e family farms. The roots are processed 
and prepared as a subsistence crop for home c onsumption and for sale in village markets 
and shipment to urban centres. Over the past 30 to 50 years, smallholders in Ghana and 
Nigeria have increased the production of ca ssava as a cash crop, primarily for urban 
markets. This shift from production for hom e consumption to commercial production for 
urban consumers, livestock feed and industr ial uses can be described as the cassava 
transformation (Table 1). 
During the cassava transformation, high-yieldi ng cassava varieties increase yields while 
labour-saving harvesting methods and improved processing technology reduce the cost of 
producing and processing cassava food products to the point where they are competitive 
with food grains such as wheat, so rghum and rice for urban consumers 3 . Looking ahead, 
as the costs of cassava production, harvesting, processing and marketing are reduced, one 
can expect cassava to play an expanded role  as a source of industrial raw material in 
Africa and as a source of foreign exchange earnings through the export of cassava pellets 
for livestock feed. 
3 This does not mean transformation in the processing sense from fresh root to processed forms. 
3 PRODUCTION TRENDS 
In the early 1960s, Africa accounted for 40 percent of world cassava production and 
Brazil was the world's leading cassava producer. However, thirty years later in the early 
1990s, Africa produced half of the total world cassava output and Nigeria replaced Brazil 
as the leading producing country globally (FAOS TAT). Two forces explain this dramatic 
growth. First, demand for cassava has expa nded because of rapid population growth and 
increased poverty thus, encouraging consumers to search for cheaper sources of calories. 
Second, the supply of cassava has expanded because genetic research and better 
agronomic practices have boosted cassava yields, especially in Ghana and Nigeria. 
3.1 AREA CULTIVATED 
In the early 1960s in Africa, cassava was pl anted in 5.6 million ha per year. Thirty-five 
years later, in the late 1990s, it was planted in 10 million ha per year. The six countries 
which currently account for most of the cassava area are the Congo, Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, 
Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. The cassava pl anted areas increased almost three fold in 
Ghana and Nigeria from 1961 to 1999 (Table 2). 
One of the critical variables in the expansion of the cassava area is the availability of 
improved processing equipment to remove wate r from the roots (the roots are 70 percent 
water) and thereby reduce the cost of tr ansportation. Improved processing and food 
preparation methods reduce bulk and make it possible for cassava products to be 
transported at reduced costs over poor roads to distant urban market centres. One 
example is the steady shipment of dried roots (cossettes) from Bandundu region of the 
Congo to the capital city, Kinshasa, by boat along the Congo River or by trucks over 
extremely poor road conditions. 
The COSCA study found that in Ghana and Nige ria, all the villages where farmers had 
access to mechanized cassava graters, reported an increase in the area planted to cassava. 
By contrast, only 60 percent of the village s where farmers did not have access to a 
mechanized cassava grater in the two countri es, reported an increase in the area planted 
to cassava. 
To summarize, between 1961 and 1999, the cassava planted areas have increased several 
fold in two of the six most important ca ssava producing countries in Africa, namely 
Ghana and Nigeria. The increase in the cassa va area in Ghana and Nigeria was driven by 
availability of processing technologies and improved road access to market centres. 
Table 1. Stages of the cassava transformation 
 I. Famine Reserve Crop II. Rural Food Staple III. Cash Crop for Urban 
Consumption 
IV. Livestock Feed & 
Industrial Raw Material
COSCA COUNTRIES Tanzania Congo, Côte d'Ivoire and Uganda Ghana and Nigeria  
*Mostly for home consumption * Mostly for home consumption 
*Cassava is the primary food staple in the Congo  
*Cassava is a secondary food staple in Côte 
d'Ivoire & Uganda 
CASSAVA 
PRODUCTION 
OBJECTIVE * Cassava is the secondary food staple 
*Cassava is a family food staple in households 
producing tree crops, such as cocoa in Côte 
d'Ivoire and coffee in Uganda 
* Mostly for sale as gun in urban centres *Industrial starch and 
pellets for export 
In areas with uncertain rainfall: * Increasing urban demand for 
convenient foods 
*Policy of substitution of 
cassava starch for 
imported starch  - Colonial governments encouraged 
cassava production as a famine-reserve 
crop starting in the 1920s 
* Improved rural roads for easy farmer 
access to market centres 
POLITICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
ENVIRONMENT 
* 
- Since independence, the Government of 
Tanzania encouraged cassava production 
during periods of drought 
*The governments of the Congo and Côte 
d'Ivoire encourage the importation of rice and 
wheat 
* Government policies encourage the 
replacement of imported wheat and rice 
with cassava food products 
*Export promotion 
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
* Colonial governments established 
research stations in Congo, Nigeria 
Tanzania, etc. 
*Early (under 12 months) 
bulking varieties 
1. Genetic 
improvement 
* Research priorities focused on controlling
cassava mosaic virus and brown streak 
virus 
* IITA developed high-yielding TMS varieties 
* IITA organized training programmes for national cassava scientists 
*Cassava roots suitable for 
mechanical harvesting 
and peeling 
2. Seed * Farmer to farmer exchange of planting 
materials 
* National research and extension programmes and private-sec tor agencies multiply and 
distribute planting materials of improved varieties 
*Private seed companies 
* Timely planting  *Timely planting 
* High stand density *Optimum stand density 
3. Agronomic practices * Farmers planted at will, compatible with 
labour demand schedule for cash crop 
* Low frequency of intercropping *Mono-cropping 
*Regular weeding 4. Weeding * Occasional weeding using hand hoe by 
family labour 
* Regular weeding with hand hoe by hired labour 
*Mechanized weeding 
* Complete harvesting 
* Harvesting at 12 months or less 
*Harvesting in 12 months 
or less 
* Harvesting with hand hoe 
5. Harvesting * Partial harvesting with hand hoe, using 
family labour 
* Use of hired labour 
*Mechanized harvesting 
6. Processing * Manual processing with hand tools * Partly ma nual, partly mechanized *Fully mechanized 
7. Food products * Roots eaten in fresh form, or as pastes, as 
well as dried roots 
* Convenient food products    
Table 2. COSCA countries: Total area (million ha) planted to cassava per year, 1961 
to 1965 compared with 1995 to 1999 
Country 1961 to 1965 1995 to 1999 % Change 
        
Congo 1.37 2.19 60 
Côte d'Ivoire 0.20 0.33 65 
Ghana 0.15 0.60 300 
Nigeria 0.83 2.94 254 
Tanzania 0.59 0.62 5 
Uganda 0.29 0.35 21 
Source: Nweke et al. 2001 
3.2 YIELD 
In 1954, the average cassava yield in Africa was between 5 and 10 tonnes per ha (Jones, 
1959). The COSCA study found that the average yield was between 10 and 15 tonnes per 
ha in the six COSCA countries in the early 1990s. Therefore, one can safely say that the 
cassava yield was increasing in Africa in th e early 1990s because of the planting of high-
yielding varieties and the adoption of better agronomic practices4. 
In early 1991, the COSCA yield measurements showed that the average on-farm cassava 
fresh roots yield (hereafter yield) for th e six COSCA study countries was 11.9 tonnes per 
ha5. The average farm-level yield was highest  in Nigeria where the mean was 14.7 tonnes 
per ha followed by Ghana where the mean was 13.1 tonnes per ha (Figure 1). The mean 
yield was around 10 tonnes per ha in Côte d'Ivoire, the Congo, Tanzania and Uganda, 
respectively. 
In 1973, Lagemann studied cassava yields in th ree villages in southeastern Nigeria with 
different population densities and concluded th at cassava yield declined as population 
pressure increased (Lagemann, 1977). Lagema nn found the mean yields for the three 
villages to be 2 tonnes per ha in the high population density village; 3.8 tonnes per ha in 
the medium; and 10.8 tonnes per ha in the low population density village. 
In 1993, the COSCA study team re-visited the same  three villages to assess the trends in 
the cassava yield 20 years after the La gemann 1973 study. The COSCA team found that 
the mean yields for the same villages we re 4.04 tonnes per ha in the high population 
density village; 4.77 tonnes per ha in the me dium density; and 9.27 tonnes per ha in the 
low population density villages. Between 1973 and 1993, the cassava yield doubled in the 
high-density village, increased by 25 percent in  the medium-density village and declined 
by 15 percent in the low-density village (Fi gure 2). This is a surprising result that 
deserves to be carefully examined. 
The doubling of cassava yield in the high popul ation density village is because farmers 
planted the high-yielding TMS varieties at high stand densities, employed hired labour 
and enjoyed ready access to a nearby market 6. By contrast, yields declined in the low 
population density village because farmers plan ted local varieties at low stand densities 
(Enete et al., 1995). The evidence from the COSCA study demonstrates that farmers have 
adopted new technologies such as the impr oved varieties and the improved agronomic 
practices as a response to increased popul ation pressure on land. This finding adds 
evidence to the Boserup hypothesis that incr eased population pressure can help induce 
intensification of agricultural production (Boserup, 1981). 
4 In Africa, long-term research from th e 1930s to the 1970s led to the developm ent of high-yielding cassava varieties 
(the TMS varieties) that increased farm yields by 40 per cent without the addition of fertilizer. The TMS varieties were 
released to farmers in Nigeria in the late 1970s. 
5 Root yield as distinct from root yield; in some cassava producing countries in Africa such as the Congo and Tanzania, 
cassava leaves are harvested and eaten as a vegetable. 
6 There is a positive relationship between stand density and yield. Farmers in high population density villages plant at 
high stand densities because of shortage of land. 
Figure 1. Southeast Nigeria: Percentage changes in cassava yield from 1973 to 1993 
in Low-,Medium-, and high-population density villages 
 
Sources: COSCA study, Lagemann 1977 
Figure 2. Cassava yield (tonnes/ha) in the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Chana, Nigeria, 
Tanzania and Uganda, 1991 
 
Source: COSCA study 
3.3 PRODUCTION 
Between 1961 and 1999, total cassava production in Africa nearly tripled from 33 million 
tonnes per year in the early 1960s to 87 million tonnes per year in the late 1990s 
(FAOSTAT). Food shortages precipitated by a combination of political and civil unrest, 
economic stagnation, erratic rainfall pattern s and rapid population growth have had a 
much greater influence on cassava production in  Africa than anywhere else in the world 
(Scott et al., 2000). 
Most of the dramatic increase in cassava production in Africa was achieved in Ghana and 
Nigeria. In both countries, the production gr owth rate was higher than the rate of 
population growth. In the other COSCA st udy countries, an increase in cassava 
production kept pace with population growt h. The dramatic increase in cassava 
production in both Ghana and Nigeria was ach ieved through an increase in both area and 
yields. The availability of cassava graters to  farmers in both countries released labour, 
especially female labour, from cassava pr ocessing for planting more cassava. Common 
use of hired labour in both countries and wide adoption of the high-yielding TMS cassava 
varieties were responsible for higher cassava yields than in the other COSCA countries. 
3.4 CASSAVA VARIETIES 
Farmers in Africa grow several cassava vari eties. For example, the COSCA researchers 
identified over 1 000 local cassava varieties in six counties of the study, namely the 
Congo, Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. The farmers group the local 
cassava varieties into the bitter and the sweet varieties
7. The sweet varieties are more 
popular in Côte d'lvoire, Ghana and Uganda while the bitter varieties are more common 
in the Congo, Nigeria and Tanzania. The COSCA farmers reported that the bitter 
varieties are more resistant to pests, highe r yielding and store better in the ground than 
the sweet varieties. 
Farmers, however, plant sweet varieties in the forest zone more than in the transition and 
the savannah zones because limited sunshine in  the forest zone makes it difficult to sun-
dry the roots after they have been soaked to eliminate cyanogens. Tree crop farmers also 
plant sweet varieties which they eat without  the soaking and sun-drying (and not fearing 
cyanide poisoning). As the productivity of the cassava system increases and more cassava 
is processed as gari, the issue of the sweet or the b itter cassava varieties will become 
irrelevant. 
3.5 PESTS AND DISEASES 
Cassava has been under attack by pests and diseases, such as the mealybug, green mite, 
mosaic disease and the bacterial blight. The biological control method has been used to 
bring the mealybug under control while the biologi cal control of the green mite is still in 
progress (Herren et al., 1987 and Yanine k, 1994). The most promising method of 
controlling the mosaic disease and the bacterial blight is breeding resistant varieties, 
which involves a long and painstaking proce ss of breeding and diffusion. Meanwhile, the 
green mite, mosaic disease and the bacterial blight continue to cause yield losses in 
various parts of Africa. 
In the late 1980s, an epidemic of an extremely severe form of the mosaic disease spread 
through most of Uganda. Researchers discovered that a new form of cassava gemini virus 
caused the virus epidemic. The Uganda vari ant of the gemini virus is now widely 
distributed in Uganda (Harrison et al., 1997). 
African farmers usually do not attempt to c ontrol the cassava pests and diseases with 
pesticides because of the limited access to ch emicals and because it is not profitable to 
apply pesticides on cassava. However, farmer s use the following agronomic practices to 
achieve partial control of the cassava pest s and diseases: fallow rotation, crop rotation 
and selection of the pests and diseases-resistant local varieties. 
Most of the major cassava pests and diseases  are new in Africa as they were introduced 
only within the last 30 years. Improved quaran tine inspection is needed to prevent, as 
much as possible, further introduction of new problems. There is a need for better 
preparedness to control new problems before they spread and take root in Africa. 
3.6 GENETIC IMPROVEMENT 
Cassava genetic improvement research has been conducted by African smallholders, by 
researchers in colonial and post-independent  research stations and by scientists in 
international research centres such as IITA and Centro Internacional de Agricultura 
Tropical (CIAT). Farmers selected self-seeded plants from local varieties that possessed 
the superior attributes which they desire such as high yield, early bulking, in-ground 
storage, pest and disease tolerance, processing qualities, large canopy and low cyanogens 
level.8 
The colonial governments' research on cassava  was inspired by the appearance and rapid 
spread of the mosaic disease in East  Africa and by the colonial governments' 
determination to encourage the planting of cassava as a famine-reserve crop in their 
colonies. The colonial governments set up cassava research programmes in various 
countries in West, Central and East Africa, but the most successful was the one set up at 
the Amani Research Station in Tanzania in the 1930s. The mosaic disease-resistant 
hybrids developed at the Amani research station between 1935 and 1957 served as the 
foundation for IITA's research programme on cassava in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Soon after most African countries became independent in the 1960s, cassava research 
languished in most national research programmes. In 1971, IITA established a research 
programme on cassava. IITA's programme bu ilt on local materials and on materials 
collected from various parts of the world (par ticularly from the Amani Research Station), 
helped national agricultural research systems to establish cassava programmes and 
establish partnerships with farmers, the private sector and numerous national cassava 
programmes. 
For example, IITA realized that national cassava research programmes were under 
funded and in a state of disarray. Most nationa l agricultural research systems in Africa 
did not have cassava research programmes in the early 1970s. IITA needed to help 
develop strong national cassava research programmes in cassava producing countries in 
Africa in order for IITA's cassava varieties a nd agronomic practices to be evaluated over 
a wide range of African agro-ecologies. IITA took steps to persuade governments of 
several of the large cassava producing c ountries to establish cassava research 
programmes in the agricultural research system
9. 
To facilitate cooperation among scientists in  national programmes, the International 
Society for Tropical Root Crops - African  Branch (ISTRC-AB) was founded in 1978 by 
IITA. Regional root crop research networks were set up in Eastern and Southern Africa in 
1987/88 with support from IITA. The national research capacity which IITA helped to 
build, made it possible for IITA's varieties and field practices to be evaluated over a wide 
range of environments in Africa. 
IITA developed high-yielding mosaic-resistant varieties in six years (1971 to 1977) of 
research. These new high-yielding mosa ic-resistant varieties included TMS 50395, 
63397, 30555, 4(2)1425 and 30572 (hereafter cited as TMS varieties). The new TMS 
varieties out-yielded local varieties on farm ers' fields by 40 percent without fertilizer. 
COSCA studies in Nigeria found that the TMS va rieties are superior to local varieties in 
terms of yield, earliness and pest and disease tolerance and they are as good as the local 
varieties in terms of various post-harvest attributes and for intercropping. 
The evolution of cassava breeding in Africa can  be described as a human ladder. Starting 
in the 1930s, one generation of breeders climbe d on the shoulders of the past generations 
until they hit the jackpot with the TMS varieties in the mid 1970s (Table 3). 
The cassava genetic improvement in Africa how ever, represents work in progress. For 
example, although the TMS varieties bulk earlier than the local varieties, they are not 
suitable for intensive commercial production becau se they take 13 to 15 months to attain 
maximum bulking. If farmers plant cassava  under continuous cultivation, it will be 
harvested at less than 12 months and before  it has attained its maximum yield. Cassava 
producers in Nigeria who plant the TMS varie ties and make gari available for sale in 
urban markets, complain that the peeling of  the roots of the TMS varieties is labour 
intensive. The roots of the TMS varietie s are not suitable for the development of 
mechanized peeling because they lack uniform shape and size. 
8 Cassava does not have a period of maturity. As the plant gr ows the root continues to bulk (swell) until after a stage of 
three or four years when deterioration begins. 
9 For example, in the Congo, the Programme National du Ma nioc (PRONAM) was established in 1974; in Nigeria, the 
National Root Crops Research Institute (NRCRI) was establis hed in 1975; in Côte d'lvoire, the cassava programme of 
the Institut des Savannes (IDESSA) was established in 1979; and in Uganda, the National Root Crop Research 
Programme was established in 1981. Thes e programmes were established with IITA's technical assistance and with 
financial assistance secured with IITA' s support from international donor agencies such as the USAID, IFAD, Gasby 
Foundation, etc. 
3.7 DIFFUSION OF TMS VARIETIES 
The TMS varieties are widely diffused in Ni geria and to a lesser extent in Ghana and 
Uganda. 
Diffusion in Nigeria. The rapid diffusion of the TMS varieties in Nigeria starting in 1977 
was facilitated by the 40 percent increase in fa rm-level yield, the profitability of the new 
varieties, the collaboration of National Root  Crops Research Institute (NRCRI), the oil 
sector, the World Bank, IFAD, churches, the Nigerian Cassava Growers Association; and 
by government oil revenue and the availability of low cost gasoline. 
The diffusion in Nigeria was also facilitated by the physical presence of IITA in Nigeria. 
IITA's cassava diffusion programme multiplied and distributed TMS planting materials 
directly to farmers and indirectly thr ough informal channels such as schools and 
churches. IITA's diffusion programme mobilized the private sector, particularly the oil 
sector, for assistance in the distribution of the TMS varieties. IITA's cassava programme 
also mobilized the mass media including th e newspapers, radio and television to 
publicize the availability and benefits of the TMS varieties. 
The boom in the petroleum industry in the 1970s and the resultant economic expansion in 
Nigeria led to an increase in the purchasing power of urban consumers and an increase in 
demand for convenient food products such as gari. With the aid of the petroleum 
revenue, Nigeria was able to improve rural ro ads; expand agricultural research, extension 
and higher education institutions and finan ce nationwide demonstrations of the TMS 
varieties. 
Yet it is important to point out that im proved cassava food preparation technologies, 
namely gari preparation and the mechanized grater , were in place at the farm-level in 
Nigeria before the TMS varieties were introduced to farmers in the late 1970s. The 
availability of mechanized processing equipment and gari preparation technologies 
greatly increased the profitability of the TMS varieties. 
Finally, farmers were able to utilize mechani zed graters because diesel and gasoline were 
cheap and readily available. Mechanized grat ers have saved labour and shifted the labour 
constraint from grating to the labour-intensi ve tasks of harvesting, peeling and toasting. 
The labour requirements for those tasks increase in direct proportions with yield. The end 
result is that farmers who adopted the TMS vari eties are often restricted in the amount of 
cassava they can produce by the labour bottlenecks at the harvesting, peeling and toasting 
stages. 
Mechanization of any of the harvesting, peeli ng and toasting tasks will enable farmers to 
plant a larger area to the TMS varieties. There is an urgent need for breeders to develop 
varieties which attain a maximum yield in le ss than 12 months and have uniform roots in 
shape and size in order to facilitate the development of mechanical harvesters and 
peelers. 
Diffusion in Ghana and Uganda.  In 1988, IITA helped the G overnment of Ghana to 
secure financial assistance from interna tional donor agencies to launch a nationwide 
programme of on-farm testing of the TMS va rieties. It took five years, 1988 to 1993, to 
evaluate the TMS varieties under field conditions and multiply the stem cuttings. In 1993, 
sixteen years after the release of the TMS varieties in Nigeria in 1997, the Government of 
Ghana officially released three TMS varieties, namely TMS 30572, TMS 50395 and 
TMS 4(2)1425. In 1998 the Root and Tuber Improvement Programme was initiated by 
the Ministry of Food and Agriculture in Kumasi to multiply and distribute plant cuttings 
of TMS varieties. In December 2000, the tota l area planted with the TMS varieties for 
multiplication was 1 142 ha (Otoo and Afuakwa, 2001). 
The diffusion of the TMS varieties in  Ghana from 1993 to 2001 has not been 
documented. However, in early 2001, cassava researchers at the Crops Research Institute, 
Kumasi reported that TMS varieties covered larg e areas of farmers' fields in the Eastern, 
Greater Accra and Volta regions where farmers prepare gari for sale in urban centres 
(Otoo and Afuakwa, 2001). 
Ghana's official release of the TMS varieties in 1993, 16 years after they were released in 
Nigeria, represents a delayed diffusion, which is  attributed to a variety of reasons. First, 
the Government historically invested in ma ize research, the primary food staple and only 
initiated cassava research in the national ag ricultural research systems (NARs) in 1980. 
Second, some influential Ghanaian scientists did not encourage the Government to import 
the TMS varieties because the influential Ghanaian scientists were proud of their 
breeding work. 

Table 3. The human research ladder: Linkages between cassava research in Tanzania and Nigeria, 1935 to 2000 
Station Year Researcher Goal/Approach Achievement/Comment 
      TANZANIA 1935 TO 1957   
Amani 1935 to 1937 Storey Control cassava mosaic virus and cassava 
bacterial blight by introduction of resistant 
varieties 
Over 100 cassava varieties were introduced from various parts of the 
world 
  1937 to 1951 Storey and 
Nichols 
Rubber tree species x cassava hybridization Developed rubber tree x cassava hybrids resistant to mosaic 
  1951 to 1957 Storey and 
Jennings 
Intercross the Storey/Nichols hybrids to 
increase resistance to mosaic disease 
Developed hybrids that showed higher and more stable resistance over 
a wide area (including the Ceara rubber x cassava hybrid, 58308) than 
the hybrids created by Storey and Nichols and distributed them to 
several countries including Nigeria. The Amani research programme 
was terminated in 1957 
      NIGERIA: 1958 TO 2000   
Moor 
Plantation 
1958 to 1960 Beck and 
Ekandem 
Combine the mosaic disease resistance genes 
of the Ceara rubber x cassava hybrid, 58308, 
with the genes for high yield from West 
African varieties 
Programme was transferred to Umudike research station at 
independence in 1960 
Umudike 1960 to 1970 Ekandem Combine the mosaic disease resistance genes 
of the Ceara rubber x cassava hybrid, 58308, 
with the genes for high yield from West 
African varieties 
  
IITA, 
Ibadan 
1971 to 1994 Hahn Combine the mosaic-resistant genes of the 
Ceara rubber x cassava hybrid, 58308, with 
genes from local and exotic varieties with high 
yield, good root quality, low cyanogens and 
resistance to lodging 
The famous TMS varieties were developed from 1971 to 1977 and 
released to farmers in Nigeria in 1977 
      Enhance earliness of bulking and root 
carotene, develop appropriate canopy sizes for 
leaf harvest and intercropping and improve 
pests and diseases resistance 
Developed varieties that are resistant to more pests and diseases and 
have different canopy sizes and distributed them to national cassava 
research programmes in Africa for on-farm testing and selection 
Source: Nweke et al 2001 
In Uganda, government and donor interest in  the diffusion of the TMS varieties was 
sparked by the appearance and rapid spread of th e rare form of cassava mosaic disease in 
the late 1980s. Beginning in 1991, TMS 6014, TMS 30337 and TMS 30572 were 
multiplied. In 2000, approximately 80 000 ha of the mosaic-resistant TMS varieties were 
being grown in Uganda (Otim-Nape et al., 2000). 
3.8 AGRONOMIC PRACTICES 
Fallow systems.  There are three main fallow system s in Africa: the long fallow, short 
fallow and continuous cultivation. Due to population growth, cassava cultivation under 
the long fallow system has declined in Africa. The distribution of cassava fields surveyed 
by COSCA researchers was as follows: long fa llow, 5 percent; short fallow, 75 percent; 
and continuous cultivation, 20 percent. Mo st farmers now produce cassava under the 
short fallow system because of cassava's l ong growth period, pests and disease problems 
and compatibility with crops such as yam and maize, which are grown in association with 
cassava. Cassava production under continuous cu ltivation is an increasing practice in 
many African countries in response to the increasing population pressure on land. 
Increasing production of cassava under continuous cultivation points to the need for 
early-bulking and pests and diseases-resistant cassava varieties. 
Cassava planting. In Africa, the main source of cassa va planting materials is from the 
farmers' fields, neighbours and sometimes  cassava marketing middleperson. Some 
farmers who produce cassava as a cash crop, pl ant healthy-looking cuttings from plants 
not older than 12 months. Some farmers do not always discard stems affected by pests or 
diseases even though this is a common way of spreading the pests and diseases (Rossel et 
al., 1994). 
In the forest zone where biomass production is higher than the savannah zone, there is an 
abundance of cassava stem cuttings for planting. However, in the savannah zone, cuttings 
for planting are often in short supply. Th e COSCA study found that farmers in the 
savannah zone discontinue the use of varietie s, which produce low yields of the planting 
material. Farmers need help with the supply of healthy cassava planting materials 
particularly in the savannah zone. 
The cassava plant density is an important agronomic consideration because it is positively 
and strongly correlated with the cassava  yield. The most commonly recommended 
spacing for cassava is 1 m x 1 m which is equi valent to a plant density of 10 000 stands 
per ha (Onwueme, 1978). The average farm-lev el plant density for the six COSCA study 
countries was 8 000 plants per ha. The cassava stand density in the farmers' fields varies 
widely from 500 plants per ha to 40 000 plan ts per ha depending on climatic zone, the 
cassava morphological characteristics such as branching type and leaf shape, soil fertility 
status, seed-bed type and cropping pattern, et c. Farmers who plant cassava as a cash crop 
plant at higher plant densities than farmers who plant the crop as a famine-reserve crop or 
as a rural food staple. 
The factors surrounding cassava plant density are so numerous that the optimal plant 
density for high cassava yield is location specifi c. Local agronomic research is needed to 
determine the optimum cassava plant density. Research on cassava is not carried out at 
the required local level in any of the six COSCA study countries because the NARs do 
not have the resources necessary for detailed cassava field experiments. 
In Africa, cassava is frequently grown as an  intercrop with other crops (Fresco, 1986). In 
the six COSCA study countries, 60 percent of the cassava fields are intercropped and 40 
percent mono-cropped. Cassava/maize intercrop is the most common, constituting about 
50 percent of all cassava-based intercropped fields. Other combinations are cassava/bean 
(or pea), cassava/banana (or plantain), cassava/rice, cassava/millet (or sorghum), 
cassava/yam and cassava/sweet potato. Cassava 's flexible planting schedule, its wide 
interspacing and its slow rate of growth rela tive to maize, for example, make it suitable 
for intercropping. 
Cassava does not have a critical planting date as long as there is enough moisture at 
planting for rooting to commence. The actual date of planting is determined by the arrival 
of the rainy season. In West Africa, cassava is planted from the beginning of the rainy 
season (February–March) to the end of the rainy season (October-November). 
The cassava planting date is also significan tly influenced by the intercropping needs of 
farmers. Farmers delay the planting of cassava in intercropped fields, depending on the 
growth cycle of the associated  crop. If the associated crop is a short-cycle crop such as 
maize, cassava is often planted one month la ter than the maize. If the associated crop 
such as yam has a long growing period, cassava is often planted as much as three months 
later than the yam. The delayed planting st rategy reduces competition for insulation and 
soil fertility between cassava and the intercrops thus allowing the mono-crop stand 
density to be maintained for cassava. The strategy is possible because cassava is drought 
resistant provided there is enough moisture at planting for rooting to commence. 
To summarize, farmers need assistance w ith a supply of healthy cassava planting 
materials. Local agronomic research is needed to determine optimum plant stand 
densities. Cassava's flexible planting date enables farmers to plant high-yielding large-
canopy cassava varieties in intercropping. Th e cassava intercrops are grown on small 
family plots. For example, the COSCA study found that the average cassava field area 
per household was less than one hectare in all the COSCA study countries. The 
predominance of intercropping and sma ll farm size in cassava production has 
implications for development of cassava production technologies in Africa. 
Production and harvesting.  Cassava is reputed to be a crop that requires relatively low 
labour inputs for production. However, COSCA re search confirms that this conventional 
wisdom is valid only where cassava is produ ced as a famine-reserve crop or as a rural 
food staple. When cassava is produced as a cash crop, farmers use significantly more 
labour. In most of the COSCA study villages,  all the field tasks for cassava production 
are done manually, using simple implements su ch as a hand hoe and a cutlass. In Nigeria 
where the TMS varieties and improved agr onomic practices have boosted yields by 40 
percent, the labour constraint has shifted from cassava weeding to cassava harvesting. 
Harvesting is now proving to be a serious c onstraint on the spread of TMS varieties 
because labour for cassava harvesting increases in direct proportion to yield. 
The general food supply outlook, market conditions and labour availability for harvesting 
and processing influence the cassava-harvesting schedule. During drought and a period of 
attractive market prices farmers harvest their cassava early, sometimes before roots attain 
their maximum bulking. For the six COSCA st udy countries, the average age of cassava 
fields at harvest was 11.9 months with a range of six to 49 months. 
Cassava is planted as a cash crop in Gh ana and Nigeria. The amount of cassava 
harvesting labour per hectare was higher in Gh ana and Nigeria than in the other COSCA 
study countries. In fact, Table 4 shows that harvesting cassava is the most labour-
intensive field task in Ghana and particular ly in Nigeria where the TMS varieties and 
improved agronomic practices have boosted yiel ds by 40 percent. In Ghana and Nigeria, 
the labour constraint has shifted from cassa va weeding to cassava harvesting. Harvesting 
is now proving to be a serious constraint on the spread of TMS varieties. It is not 
surprising that those farmers who plant TMS varieties in Nigeria have sometimes had to 
suspend planting because they were unable to hire sufficient labour to harvest previously 
planted cassava fields. 
Table 4. Cassava production by task and days per ha in the Congo, Côte d'lvoire, 
Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda 
Task Congo Côte d'lvoire Ghana Nigeria Tanzania Uganda 
              
Land clearing 66 53 44 49 54 45 
Seed-bed preparation 21 29 31 41 27 31 
Planting 39 22 28 32 27 28 
Weeding 27 28 34 38 28 32 
Harvesting 48 44 53 62 46 52 
Total days 201 173 191 222 182 187 
Source: Nweke et al 2001 
To date, most public sector research on ca ssava has focused on genetic research. Very 
little research has focused on developing machines to harvest cassava. Without question, 
a mechanical revolution is now needed to  break the labour bottleneck in cassava 
harvesting among farmers in Ghana and Nigeria who are planting the TMS varieties. 
3.9 SUMMARY 
The analyses in this section show that farmers will introduce new agronomic practices 
(length of fallow period, quality of planti ng material, plant density, planting date, 
cropping pattern, quality of weeding and age of the cassava roots at harvest) as cassava 
production becomes profitable. However, progressive farmers who adopt improved 
agronomic practices are facing production a nd harvesting labour bottlenecks which are 
limiting the amount of cassava they can grow. 
Without question, agronomic and genetic-induced productivity changes are important 
sources of growth in the cassava industr y. Mechanical technology for cassava production 
and harvesting is needed to complement improved agronomic practices and high-yielding 
varieties. The mechanization of harvesting is needed to break labour bottlenecks, increase 
labour productivity and encourage the farmers to increase the use of TMS varieties. 
4 CASSAVA PROCESSING 
4.1 FIVE MAJOR CASSAVA FOOD PRODUCTS 
In Africa, there are five common groups of cassava products: fresh root, dried roots, 
pasty products, granulated products and cassava leaves10. 
Fresh root. The roots of sweet cassava varieties are eaten raw, roasted in an open fire, or 
boiled in water or oil. The cyanogens in the roots are destroyed by slowly cooking the 
roots. Starting with cold water, gradual h eating promotes the hydrolysis of the cyanogen 
(Grace, 1977). 
Dried roots. Dried cassava roots are stored or mark eted as chips, balls and flour. Chips 
and balls are milled into flour at home by pounding with a pestle and mortar in 
preparation for a meal. There are two broad t ypes of dried cassava roots: fermented and 
unfermented. Preparing unfermented dried cassa va roots by sun- or smoke-drying is the 
simplest method of cassava preparation. Si nce this method is inefficient in the 
elimination of cyanogens, it is used mostly for preparing sweet cassava varieties, which 
have low cyanogen content. 
In the case of fermented dried cassava roots,  the fermentation is accomplished in one of 
two ways: stacking in heaps or soaking in water for a number of days. The fermentation 
process, whether in water or in heaps, influences the taste of the final product. The longer 
the fermentation period, the stronger is the sour  taste. Taste is an important attribute, 
especially for consumers who eat fermented cassava products and who desire the strong 
sour taste. 
The recent introduction of a grater has eliminated stacking and fermentation and therefore 
saves time. The roots are simply peeled, washed and grated 11. The pulp is placed in a 
perforated container, covered and a wei ght put on it for about three hours and the 
cyanogens are squeezed out along with effluent. The half-dried pulp is then dried in the 
sun (Alyanak, 1997). 
In Africa, cassava is sun-dried on virtually a ny surface in the open air such as a large flat 
rock in the field, on the shoulders of a paved ro ad, on flat roof tops, in a flat basket, or 
even on bare ground. Bright colour is an important attribute desired by consumers 12 . The 
colour of dried roots depends on the met hod and duration of the fermentation, on the 
method of drying, the efficiency of the dr ying energy and the cleanliness of the drying 
environment. 
Pasty products. Two forms of pasty cassava products are common in Africa: uncooked 
and steamed pastes. The most popular is called uncooked paste because it is stored or 
marketed without cooking. To prepare the uncooked paste, the roots are soaked in water 
for three to five days, during which time the roots soften and ferment. The soaked roots 
are manually crushed and sieved by shaking it in  a basket in a sack under water, thereby 
separating the pulp into the sack while collecting the fibre in the basket. 
Cooked cassava pasty products have been recen tly introduced in Nigerian urban markets. 
Every evening in major cities in the cassava growing areas of Nigeria, it is common to 
find women selling cooked cassava paste wra pped in plastic bags. As women go home 
from work or from the market, they st op and buy some for the evening meal. Although 
more research is needed on preparation me thods, cooked cassava paste is a promising 
food for busy urban consumers. 
Steamed paste (for example chickwangue in the Congo) is a product that can be stored or 
marketed in a steamed form. To prepare the paste, fibre is rem oved by hand from roots 
fermented by soaking in water. The roots are th en stacked in a heap to further ferment. 
The pulp is ground with a stone or pounded in a mortar. The resulting fine pulp is firmly 
wrapped in leaves and steamed. 
The double fermentation as well as the steam ing imparts a long shelf-life to steamed 
paste. The sour flavour achieved through extended fermentation is a characteristic that is 
cherished by regular customers. It is also a turn-off to potential new consumers. 
Steamed paste is stored or marketed in a r eady-to-eat form. Preparing steamed paste is 
expensive because many steps are involved a nd each one requires additional inputs. For 
example, grinding and sieving are labour-int ensive. The soaking step is water-use 
intensive and steaming is fuel wood-use intensive. In the Congo, steamed paste -
chickwangue- is prepared entirely by women. 
Granulated products.  In Africa, there are three comm on types of granulated cassava 
products: gari, attieke and tapioca. The methods for making granulated cassava products 
originated in Brazil. To prepare gari, fresh cassava roots are p eeled, washed and grated. 
The resulting pulp is put in a porous sack and weighted down with a heavy object for 
three to four days to express effluent from the pulp while it is fermenting. The de-watered 
and fermented lump of pulp is pulverized and sieved and the resulting semi-dry fine pulp 
is toasted in a pan. The grating, effluent  expressing, pulverization, toasting and the 
addition of palm oil are adequate to reduce cyanogens to a safe level (Hahn, 1989). 
Fermentation imparts a sour taste to gari. The duration of fermentation varies depending 
on consumer preference for sour taste.  The COSCA study found that commercial gari 
processors in Nigeria ferment cassava fo r different lengths of time depending on the 
market. Toasting extends the shelf-life so that gari can be easily transported to urban 
markets. If kept in a dry environment, gari will store better than grain because gari is not 
known to be attacked by weevils (Okigbo, 1984). 
The second type of granulated cassava products is attieke, a type of steamed cassava that 
is found only in the Côte d'lvoire. Attieke is made in much the same way as gari with 
more or less the same inputs. However, instead of toasting, attieke is steamed. Attieke is 
available in a wet form and it has a shorter shelf-life than gari. 
The third type of granulated cassava product is tapioca, which is primarily consumed in 
Benin, and Togo 13. To prepare tapioca, cassava is grated and then put in water, pressed 
and kneaded to release the starch. The starch is permitted to settle at the bottom of the 
container and the water is drained off. The ope ration is repeated several times to prepare 
a high quality product. The damp starch is spread on a pan and toasted in the same way as 
gari, to form a coarse granular product. 
Cassava leaves. Cassava leaves are edible and a more convenient food product than fresh 
roots. Cassava leaves are storable in dry form and since they have lower water content, 
they are less expensive to dry than the roots.  If leaf harvesting is properly scheduled, it 
does not have an adverse effect on cassava root yield (Dahniya, 1983 and Lutaladio and 
Ezumah, undated). Cassava leaves have a nut ritive value similar to other dark green 
leaves and are an extremely valuable sour ce of vitamins A (carotene) and C, iron, 
calcium and protein (Latham, 1979). The c onsumption of cassava leaves helps many 
Africans compensate for the lack of protein a nd some vitamins and minerals in the roots. 
Cassava leaves are prepared by leaching them in hot water, pounding them into pulp with 
a pestle and mortar before boiling in wate r along with groundnuts, fish and oil. This 
process eliminates cyanogens from the leaves, making them safe for human consumption. 
Cassava leaves are an important vegetable in the Congo and Tanzania. The COSCA study 
found that farmers in the Congo select cassava varieties with a large canopy of leaves. In 
Tanzania, farmers plant tree cassava -mpiru - for the production of leaves. In countries 
where cassava leaves are eaten as vegetables, producers earn additional income by selling 
cassava leaves. Truck loads of cassava leaves, locally called pondu in the Congo, are a 
common sight on the roads from the provinces to urban markets in Kinshasa. 
Cassava leaves are not eaten in Uganda because their consumption is considered an 
indicator of low economic status (Otim-Nap e, 1995). Cassava leaves are not eaten in 
West Africa, except in Sierra Leone, because several indigenous plants supply vegetables 
traditionally consumed with yam (Okigbo, 1980). Most of these vegetables are however, 
available only during the rainy season. Ther efore, there is a seasonal gap in the 
availability of vegetables in West Africa which cassava leaves could fill. 
10 It is difficult to separate cassava processing from cassava food preparation because some combinations of the cassava 
processing and food preparation activities lead to final cassa va food products which are in ready-to-eat forms. Other 
combinations of the cassava processing and food preparation activities lead to intermediate products which are stored 
until the need arises for conversion into ready to eat forms. 
11 This method was recently developed at IITA and it is now widely used by farmers in the major cassava producing 
countries. 
12 Fifty percent of the farmer groups interviewed in the si x COSCA study countries considered bright colour as the 
most important quality in the cassava food products, namely  the dried cassava roots, the granulated cassava food 
products and the pasty cassava food products. Twenty-five per cent considered texture, 15 percent considered taste and 
10 percent of the village groups considered other qualities as the most important in the cassava food products. 
13 It is also a common food used in making pudding for desert in the United States. 
4.2 SUMMARY 
To summarize, the traditional methods used to make five cassava products are simple and 
are able to reduce cyanogens in cassava to sa fe levels. The methods have been influenced 
by the availability of sunlight, water, fuel w ood and wage rates. This diversity of natural 
resources and differentiated wage rates have contributed to an array of cassava products 
in Africa. There is regional variation in cassava preparation methods in Africa and a 
major challenge is to diffuse the best practi ces from one region to other regions within 
Africa. 
4.3 MECHANIZED PROCESSING 
There are three common types of mechanized cassava processing machines in use in 
Africa: graters, pressers and mills. 
Mechanized grater.  The traditional method of gra ting cassava was by pounding it in a 
mortar with a pestle. Later, artisans develope d a manual grater in the form of a sheet of 
perforated metal mounted onto a flat piece of  wood. The mechanized graters were first 
introduced to Republic of Benin, by the French in the 1930s and later modified in Nigeria 
in the 1940s by welders and mechanics, using local materials such as old automobile 
motors and scrap metal. Village entrepreneurs,  who provide a grating service to farmers, 
own the mechanized graters. The mechanized grater operators allow the farmers 
flexibility in terms of working time and quantity  of cassava grated. The fee charged is a 
small fraction of the cost of grating by hand. 
In Ghana and Nigeria, commercial gari processors use the mechanized grater. The use of 
a mechanized grater has reduced gari processing costs by 50 percent and dramatically 
increased the profitability of gari production with the TMS varieties in Ghana and 
Nigeria. Since the grating task is mechani zed, peeling is now the most labour-intensive 
task followed by the toasting in gari preparation. In Côte d'Ivoire, many attieke 
processors do not use the mechanized grater because the texture of attieke made with the 
mechanized grater is not as good as that of hand-made attieke. The planting of the TMS 
varieties is not profitable to farmers who process cassava as attieke because hand grating 
is labour-intensive. 
Mechanized presser. Since cassava has high water cont ent (70 percent), various methods 
have been developed to extract the water during processing. Traditionally, effluent is 
drained from grated cassava mash by putting it in a basket, covering it with leaves and 
placing a heavy object such as stone on top of it for three to five days. Fermentation takes 
place at the same time. Nowadays, most commercial gari makers in Nigeria and attieke 
makers in Côte d'lvoire use a screw jack to extract the effluent. The mechanized presser is 
a simple hand-operated machine, which is made from wooden plates and a used 
automobile jack, both of which are available in  villages. In Nigeria, mechanized graters 
and pressers are often both operated and mainta ined by the same village entrepreneurs in 
major areas of commercial cassava production. This enables farmers to have access to 
grating, pressing, pulverizing and sieving services in a convenient location. 
Mechanized pressing reduces the processing tim e from several days to a few hours, but 
the inherent disadvantage of the mechanized presser is that it performs only the pressing 
step and it eliminates the fermentation step. Fermentation imparts a sour taste, which is 
cherished by consumers in some places such as  in southwestern Nigeria. Fermentation is 
not essential for the elimination of  cyanogens in the preparation of gari because grating, 
pressing, pulverization, sieving and toasting steps reduce the cyanogen in cassava to such 
a low level that gari is safe for human consumption. 
Mechanized mill. The traditional method of preparing cassava.flour from dried cassava 
roots is to pound the roots in mortar with a pestle. Today, mechanized mills are common 
place in the urban centres in the six CO SCA study countries. The mills were also 
observed in several COSCA villages in Ghana,  Nigeria and Uganda but in only a small 
percentage of the COSCA villages in the Congo, Côte d'lvoire and Tanzania. The 
components of the mechanized mill are also fabricated locally from scrap materials. 
4.4 NEW CHALLENGES IN MECHANIZED PROCESSING 
The following new challenges in mechanized cassava processing flow from the above-
mentioned discussion: 
• the Ghana/Nigerian mechanized grater should be introduced in the other major 
cassava producing countries in Africa. The grater is made from local materials 
and the machines are reliable and cost effective; 
• engineers and breeders should join forces  and figure out how to mechanize the 
peeling task by developing cassava roots th at are uniform in shape and size and 
having skins that meet certain specifications; 
• new technology is needed to reduce the am ount of labour in the toasting stage of 
gari preparation; 
• a mechanized grater should be developed to make attieke with a texture as good 
as hand-made attieke. 
In the past, attempts have been made in the various COSCA countries by private 
entrepreneurs to process cassava on a large-scale using integrated grating, pressing, 
pulverizing, sieving and toasting machines in a factory style of operation. However, all of 
these firms failed because of an array of pr oblems: lack of sustained public or private 
investment in research and development, shor tage of cassava roots, fragmented market 
for cassava products, unacceptable consumer taste and high cost of labour for hand 
peeling. 
Numerous public sector agencies were established in Nigeria in the 1970s and 1980s to 
develop and diffuse mechanized cassava pr ocessing machines. However, farmers have 
not adopted the machines developed by the government agencies because the machines 
are not as convenient and reliable as those developed by the small-scale private artisans. 
Important lessons for mechanization of food processing in Africa emerge from this 
analysis of the evolution of mechanized cassava processing methods. Mechanization of 
food processing must be for products that have a market demand such as gari. Since most 
villages in Africa do not have electricity a nd petroleum fuel is scarce and expensive, 
mechanized machines should be small and easy to fabricate and repair by village artisans 
using local materials such as old engines a nd scrap metals. Machines that are manually 
driven are more suitable for remote villa ges provided they can be fabricated and 
maintained by village artisans using local materials. 
The customary sweet and bitter cassava va rieties depend upon the amount of cyanogens 
(prussic acid) in the edible parts of th e roots (Jones 1959, p. 12). The roots of sweet 
cassava are low in cyanogens, mealy after cooking and usually eaten as a raw vegetable, 
boiled, or roasted in an open fire. Bitter cassava varieties are high in cyanogens, waxy 
after cooking and are harmful to humans and an imals unless they are peeled, grated and 
toasted or soaked in water for a few days and boiled or sun-dried. 
5 CASSAVA CONSUMPTION 
5.1 CONSUMPTION LEVEL 
Cassava production in Africa is used almost ex clusively for consumption as food. In fact, 
95 percent of the total cassava production, after accounting for waste, was used as food in 
Africa in the late 1990s14 In Africa, total cassava consumption more than doubled from 24 
million tonnes per year in the early 1960s to 58 million tonnes per year in the late 1990s 
(FAOSTAT). The large increase in  the total cassava consumption in Africa is due to a 
significant increase in per capita consumption in countries such as Ghana and Nigeria 
where cassava is produced as a cash crop fo r urban consumption. The availability of 
cassava in a convenient food form, such as gari, played a major role in the increase in the 
per capita cassava consumption in Ghana and Nigeria. Future increases in cassava 
consumption in other African countries will depend on how well cassava is prepared into 
food forms, which make an alternative to wheat, rice, maize and sorghum to urban 
consumers. 
Cassava roots are the single largest source of  calories in seven African countries having 
40 percent of the population in the late 1990s'
15 . In these seven countries, cassava 
contributed an average of nearly 600 calorie s per person per day. In another 11 countries 
with about 25 percent of Africa's population, cassava was the second largest source of 
calories16 . In those countries, cassava provided more than 300 calories per person per day 
in the late 1990s (FAOSTAT). Thus, in Africa, cassava roots are an important source of 
calories for about 65 percent of the total population. 
These averages underestimate the importance of cassava in specific countries. In the 
Congo, for example, many families eat cassava for breakfast, lunch and dinner. In the 
Congo, cassava contributed over 1 000 calories pe r person per day or about 55 percent of 
the average daily calorie intake in the late  1990s (FAOSTAT). Cassava leaves are widely 
consumed as a vegetable in several places wh ere cassava is grown such as in the Congo 
and Tanzania. Since cassava leaves are rich in protein, vitamins A and C and some 
minerals (iron and calcium) (Latham, 1979, p. 172) they partially compensate for, the 
shortage of these nutrients in the roots. 
Cassava was found to be the cheapest source of calories among all f ood crops in each of 
the six study countries. As family incomes increased, the consumption of cassava as dried 
root flour declined while consumption in convenient food forms such as gari increased. 
Dried cassava root flour is cheaper than gari because of the high cost of processing gari. 
Medium and high income families were found to consume gari because it is cheaper and 
more convenient to cook than grains. The fu ture of cassava as a rural and urban food 
staple will depend on cassava's ability to comp ete with wheat, rice, maize, sorghum and 
other grains in terms of cost, convenience a nd availability in urban markets. Cassava can 
retain its competitive edge only through investments in labour-saving production, 
harvesting and processing technologies. 
14 Waste was estimated to be 28 percent of the total cassava production in Africa from 1994 to 1998 (FAO 1999). 
15 The countries are: Angola, the Central African Repub lic, the Congo, the People's Republic of Congo, Ghana, 
Mozambique and Nigeria. 
16 The countries arc: the Republic of Benin, Cameroon, Cô te d'lvoire, Guinea, Liberia,  Madagascar, Sierra Leone, 
Tanzania, Togo, Uganda and Zambia. 
5.2 INCOME OF ELASTICITY OF DEMAND17 
The income elasticity of demand estimates for cassava products were found to be positive 
at all income levels. For some cassava pr oducts, the income elasticity of demand was 
above one (Table 5). For example, in Nigeria, it was surprising to discover that the 
income elasticity of demand for gari was significantly higher than that of maize at all 
income levels. Among high-income urban households, the income elasticity of demand 
for gari was also higher than that of rice. In Ghana, the income elasticity of demand for 
cassava (all products combined) was higher among urban than rural households. These 
estimates provide convincing evidence that cassava has a strong market demand in the 
COSCA study countries. 
17 The income elasticity of demand provides an insight into  the level of market demand for a commodity. The income 
elasticity of demand measures the percent of change in  the quantity of a commodity purchased (consumed) by 
consumers in response to one percent ch ange in their incomes. A negative inco me elasticity of demand means that the 
quantity of the commodity purchased by consumers will dec line with rising incomes. A zero percent income elasticity 
of demand means that the amount of the commodity dema nded will be unchanged with rising incomes. An income 
elasticity of demand between zero and one percent implies th at a one percent increase in incomes will cause consumers 
to increase the amount of the commodity  they are willing to purchase although by less than one percent. Finally, an 
income elasticity of demand of more than one percent im plies that market demand is very high for the commodity. 
Scholars and policy-makers who dismiss ca ssava as an inferior good assume that  the income elasticity of demand for 
cassava is negative or zero. 

Table 5. Income elasticity of demand for cassava and other food staples for rural households in Nigeria, Tanzania and 
Uganda; rural and urban households in Ghana 
Staple Nigeria' Tanzania * Uganda l Ghana 2 
  
All 
Sample 
Household
s 
Low 
Income 
Househol
ds 
High Income 
Households 
All Sample 
Households 
Low Income 
Households 
High Income 
Households 
All Sample 
Households 
Low Income 
Households 
High Income 
Households 
Rural 
Households
Urban 
Households
                        
All cassava 0.78 0.84 0.76 0.77 0.80 0. 66 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.73 1.46 
Fresh roots 1.24 1.28 1.21 0. 79 0.79 0.67 0.95 0.96 0.94 - - 
Gari 0.85 0.85 0.77 - - -   - - -   
Dried roots 0.55 0.57 0.53 0.75 0.80 0.66 1.17 1.15 1.13 -   
Maize 0.71 0.74 0.65 0.98 0.98 0. 97 0.91 0.85 0.91 0.84 0.83 
Rice 1.12 1.13 1.13 1.14 1.25 1. 11 1.36 1.59 1.25 1.00 1.50 
Pulses 1.02 1.01 1.02 1.06 1.05 1.07 0.78 0.84 0.69 - - 
Banana 2.06 1.97 1.69 0.94 0.93 0. 95 1.22 1.38 1.16 0.13 1.10 
Yam 0.91 0.90 0.92   -   -   - -   
Sweet potato - - - 0.97 0.97 0.74 0.79 0.64 - - - 
1. COSCA study, Ezemenari et al. 1998 and Nweke et al. 2001 
2.Alderman 1990 
The conclusion that emerges from the new data presented is that in Africa, cassava is not 
an inferior food. Rather, in certain forms,  cassava is superior to some grains. Gari has 
substantial market demand among low-, medium- and high-income rural and urban 
households. The degree to which the future market demand for cassava for food 
consumption can be expanded however, would depend largely on the extent to which the 
quality and variety of cassava food products can be improved to make them attractive to a 
range of consumers in rural and urban centres. 
The measures needed to reduce the cost of making cassava available to consumers in 
convenient food forms include: 
• development and diffusion of labour-saving technologies for cassava field tasks, 
especially for the harvesting task; 
• development and diffusion of labour-savi ng methods for cassava processing tasks 
for which such methods have not been de veloped, particularly the peeling task; 
and 
• diffusion of existing cassava processi ng technologies in areas where such 
technologies are not available. 
6 NEW USES FOR CASSAVA 
6.1 EXPANDING THE USE OF CASSAVA IN LIVESTOCK FEED 
In Africa, cassava is not widely used in the livestock feed industry. For example, in 
Nigeria in the late 1990s, only 1.5 million t onnes of cassava (5 percent of total 
production) per year was used in the livesto ck industry compared with 9.8 million tonnes 
(50 percent of total production) per year in Brazil (FAOSTAT). In Nigeria, the amount of 
cassava used in the livestock industry increased from 0.56 million tonnes per year in the 
mid 1980s after the Government banned the importation of maize in 1985/86 and feed 
mills were forced to use local raw materials such as cassava. After the import restrictions 
on maize and other crops were removed in 1995, there was no incentive for feed millers 
to reduce the quantity of cassava they were using because cassava is cheaper than maize 
and farmers were getting higher yields from TMS varieties. 
In Nigeria, the 5 percent of total cassava pr oduction that is used as feed is significantly 
lower than in Brazil (50 percent) because in  Nigeria, cattle, sheep and goats are free 
grazed and pigs rummage on household wast e. Also the poultry industry only has 125 
million birds in Nigeria as compared with 867 million in Brazil in 1998 (FAOSTAT)
18. 
Due to the pessimistic outlook for a major increase in cassava fed to livestock in Nigeria, 
the logical step is to examine the global outlook for Nigerian cassava exports for 
livestock feed. The key country to examin e is Thailand because it has dominated the 
export of cassava pellets for livestock feed for more than three decades. 
Beginning in the 1960s, the Government of Th ailand encouraged private firms to set up 
private pellet factories and produce cassava pellets for export to the EU (European 
Union). Exports increased from 100 000 tonnes in 1966 to a peak of nine million tonnes 
in 1989. However, due to competition with U.S. grain exports to the EU market, the price 
of cassava pellets has declined, making it unattractive for Thailand to produce cassava for 
export. Due to low prices, Thailand did not  meet its export quota from 1994 to 1998. In 
fact, Thai pellet exports declined from 9 million tonnes in 1989 to 3 million tonnes in 
1998 (Ratanawaraha et al., 1999, p. 18). 
The EU has allocated a quota of 145 000 tonnes of dried roots per year to the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) members excludi ng China, Indonesia and Thailand. This 
quota has never been reached. In Ghana, some entrepreneurs sought to exploit the 
opportunity offered by the WTO quota (Graffh am and Westby, 1999). Exports of dried 
roots from Ghana increased from about 1 000 tonnes in 1995 to over 51 000 tonnes in 
1996 (FAOSTAT). In 1997, world cassava prices fell from US$150 to US$100 per tonne. 
In Ghana in the same year, the price of the dried roots for food stood at US$0.13 per kg 
when the exporters were willing to pay only US$0.04 per kg to producers (Graffham and 
Westby, 1999). Consequently, the exports of dr ied roots from Ghana declined to 36 000 
tonnes in 1997; 7 000 tonnes in 1998; and less than 5 000 tonnes in 1997 (FAOSTAT). 
The implication of all this is that faced w ith depressed world prices of cassava, African 
cassava producing countries should concentr ate on expanding the use of cassava in 
livestock feed at home rather than trying to break into the EU market at this time. 
What can be done to increase the use of cassava in livestock feed in Africa? In Nigeria, a 
poultry feed trial has shown that  if cassava roots and leaves were combined in a ratio of 
four to one, the mixture could replace maize in  poultry feed and reduce feed cost without 
a loss in weight gain or egg production (T ewe and Bokanga, 2001). If this important 
research finding is diffused and adopted by farmers and livestock feed producers, the 
amount of cassava used in livestock feed in  Africa would increase. At present, cassava 
leaves have no market value except in countries such as the Congo and Tanzania where 
the leaves are consumed as a vegetable19. 
18 In 1996 to 1998, there were 19.3 million cattle and 4.5 milli on pigs in Nigeria compared with 156 million cattle and 
28 million pigs in Brazil (FAO, 2000). In Nigeria, nomadic herd ers move their cattle to wherever grass is available and 
tsetse is not a problem. The nomads neith er respect boundaries nor do they pay for grazing rights. Frequently, they are 
halted by crop farmers, including cassava farmers, when cattle graze on fields with crops. 
19 Cassava leaves are returned to the soil as organic ma tter. The cassava leaves are a good source of protein and 
vitamins and they are safe for human and animal consumption. 
6.2 EXPANDING THE USE OF CASSAVA IN FOOD MANUFACTURING 
Technologies exist for the use of cassava as a partial substitute for wheat in bread-making 
and biscuits, pastries and snack foods ma nufacture (Satin, 1988, Eggleston and Omoaka, 
1994, Defloor, 1995 and Onabolu et al., 1998). In Africa, the amount of cassava used for 
food manufacture by the food industries is insigni ficant. For example, in Nigeria in the 
late 1990s, an insignificant 3 tonnes of cassa va was used per year for food manufacture 
compared with maize, 133 000 tonnes (FAOSTAT). Use of cassava as a partial substitute 
for wheat in food manufacture will increase if the practice can result in a reduction in the 
prices of the manufactured composite cassa va and wheat flour food products compared 
with the prices of the same products made with 100 percent wheat flour. 
In Africa, due to an array of reasons, the composite cassava and wheat flour food 
products are not cheaper than the 100 percen t wheat flour food products. For example, a 
partial substitution of cassava for wheat in bread flour requires expensive supplementary 
viscosity enhancers such as eggs, milk and gum s to compensate for the lack of gluten in 
cassava (Eggleston and Omoaka, 1994, Defloor, 1995 and Onabolu et al., 1998). 
Using cassava flour for bread-making and for the manufacture of biscuits, pastries and 
snack foods requires a reliable supply of cassa va flour with constant quality (Delfoor, 
1995). In Africa, cassava flour available on the market varies widely in quality because of 
the wide range of traditional methods of prep aration used. Cassava flour of standard high 
quality will be more expensive and will increase the cost of the food products. 
Other important factors such as the cassava  variety, age of the cassava root and the 
cassava growing environment also influen ce the quality of the food products in which 
cassava flour substitutes partially for wh eat flour (Eggleston and Omoaka, 1994 and 
Defloor, 1995). Measures to standardize cassava  varieties, age of cassava roots and the 
cassava growing environments will further increase the costs of the food products in 
which the cassava flour is used to substitute partially for wheat flour. 
In Nigeria, the technologies for the use of cassava as a partial substitute for wheat flour in 
food manufacture that were developed at IITA and other research centres were adopted 
by food industries when wheat flour was made  scarce by the wheat import ban in the mid 
1980s. When the wheat import ban was rem oved in the mid-1990s, however, the food 
industries readily reverted to the use of  100 percent wheat flour in food manufacture 
(Bokanga and Tewe, 1998). 
In Africa, the increase in the use of cassa va in food manufacturing industries does not 
depend on technologies for partial substitution of  cassava flour for wheat flour in bread, 
cookies and pastries, etc., but the increase in the use of cassava in food manufacturing 
industries requires the development of t echnologies for industrial manufacture and 
packaging of traditional African cassava food products, which have a snack value such as 
gari, attieke and chickwangue. 
It was explained earlier that in Africa, past attempts to manufacture gari and 
chickwangue industrially failed because they we re unprofitable. In Brazil, however, 
recent development in the use of cassava in food industries shows that sustained 
investment in research and development can  make industrial manufacture of 100 percent 
cassava starch traditional food product profitabl e. For example, the main cassava-based 
fast food in Brazil is pao de queijo, a type of bread made with sour cassava starch, which 
has been fermented and dried (Vilpoux, Olivier and Marco Tulio Ospina, 1999). 
In Brazil, the preparation of pao de queijo by traditional methods has similar problems as 
the preparation of gari, attieke and chickwangue in Africa. For example, in Minas Gerais, 
one of the traditional pao de queijo  production states in Brazil, almost every family has 
its own recipe. Sour starch gives pao de queijo a very acid taste, which is appreciated in 
the Minas Gerais state. In other states however, where consumption is more recent, 
people prefer pao de queijo  with a mild taste. Sour starch is important in pao de queijo  
preparation because of its expansion charact eristics, which result from the combined 
action of fermentation and sun-drying. Industrial manufacture of pao de queijo  needs a 
standard product with consistent quality. Th ese criteria are difficult to maintain in pao de 
queijo because of the low and unstable quality of sour starch. Making sour starch is 
labour-intensive. The sour starch industry is  competitive with a large number of small 
producers. The small capacity limits the po ssibility to access modern technologies and 
market information (Vilpoux, Olivier and Marco Tulio Ospina, 1999). 
Through sustained investment in research and development, pao de queijo  was 
transformed from a small-scale home-made product to a large-scale factory-manufactured 
product by first replacing fermentation and sun-drying with a chemical process in making 
the sour starch. Later, the sour starch was replaced with other types of cassava starch 
which are acceptable to consumers. Sin ce the early 1990s, the preparation of pao de 
queijo by small-scale manufacturers in the traditional production states such as Minas 
Gerais has been declining while larger more modern companies are expanding in other 
states. The entrance of large companies cha nged most of the industry. The operators of 
the large companies have better education, better access to new technologies and market 
information. 
In Brazil, the research and development in the improvement of pao de queijo  were 
carried out mostly by the private sector. The expansion in the consumption of the pao de 
queijo was facilitated by political support. For example, the consumption was endorsed 
by the former President of Brazil, Itamar Franco. He required that pao de queijo  be 
present at all official meetings. Sin ce the mid-1990s, Brazilian consumption of pao de 
queijo has increased greatly, changing from a regional to a nationwide fast food. It is also 
possible to find pao de queijo  in other South American count ries such as Argentina and 
Peru (Vilpoux, Olivier and Marco Tulio Ospina, 1999). 
To summarize, there are technologies for use of  cassava as a partial substitute for wheat 
in food manufacture. In Africa, cassava is  not used for food manufacture because food 
products made with 100 percent wheat flour are cheaper and preferred by consumers. 
Sustained investment in research and deve lopment on industrial manufacture of African 
cassava food products such as gari, attieke  and chickwangue which have snack values 
can lead to the increased use of cassava in food manufacturing industries. 
6.3 CASSAVA AS AN INDUSTRIAL RAW  MATERIAL: A NIGERIAN CASE 
STUDY 
In Nigeria in the early 1990s, only about 700 tonnes of cassava starch was produced per 
year because Nigerian cassava starch is considered to be of low quality by Nigerian 
industries and none is exported. In the mi d-1990s, cassava starch only accounted for 5 
percent of the 17 000 tonnes of starch used each year as industrial raw material in Nigeria 
(RMRDC, 1996). The bulk of the starch used as industrial raw material during the mid-
1990s was imported corn starch which represen ted 80 percent of the total. The remaining 
15 percent was an unspecified type of starc h. The quantity of industrial starch used in 
Nigeria in the late 1990s was low. Even if mo st of it was made from cassava, the impact 
on the total demand for cassava would be small. 
The scope for increasing the use of cassava st arch in Nigeria's industries is to a large 
extent, limited by the ready availability of high quality imported corn starch and Nigeria's 
meagre research and development investment in preparing cassava starch for industrial 
uses. Nigerian private investors do not have the incentive to invest in cassava research 
and development because of the lack of pate nt protection. Also, Nigeria's industries that 
use starch as a raw material have access to cheaper and higher quality starch from 
imported sources. 
Table 6 illustrates the potential industrial uses  for cassava and research priorities for 
developing cassava starch and dried cassava roots as industrial raw materials in six 
different industries in Nigeria: textile, petroleum drilling, pharmaceutical, soft drink, beer 
malt and ethanol/alcohol industries. The potential is high in three industries. 
Table 6. Nigeria: Industrial potential for cassava and research and development 
priorities 
Industry Cassava-based Raw 
Material 
Potential for 
Increasing 
Cassava 
Utilization 
Required research and development 
activity 
Textile Cassava starch in direct 
form 
Medium Improve the quality of cassava starch by 
improving the method of drying cassava 
roots 
Petroleum 
drilling 
Cassava starch in direct 
form 
Medium Make cassava starch gelatinize in cold 
water 
Pharmaceutical Cassava starch 
hydrolysates including 
glucose, maltose, sucrose, 
fructose and syrup 
Medium Set up industries to make glucose, maltose, 
sucrose, fructose and syrup from cassava 
starch 
Soft drinks Syrup concentrate High Pr epare syrup concentrate from cassava 
starch and test it for suitability for making 
soft drinks 
Beer Dried cassava roots High Develop a method of making beer malt 
using dried cassava roots 
Ethanol Dried cassava roots High Set up cassava-based small-scale alcohol 
units; and carry out feasibility study of 
producing ethanol from cassava in Nigeria 
and ethanol from cassava in Ghana. 
Source: Nweke et al 2001 
The first is syrup concentrate for the soft drink industry. In Nige ria, the soft drink 
industry is dominated by Coca Cola which im ports the syrup concentrates and keeps 
them as a trade secret. Syrup concentrate has been successfully made from cassava starch 
by IITA post-harvest technologists. A pilot project is needed to determine its 
acceptability and potential profitability in making soft drinks. 
The second potential use of cassava is in th e beer industry. Beer has been brewed in 
Nigeria with imported barley malt for many decades. However, in 1985/86, Nigeria 
banned grain imports and the brewery industr y began to produce beer malt with sorghum 
produced in northern Nigeria. The initial c oncern that sorghum beer would not be 
acceptable to consumers proved to be without basis as beer consumption did not decline 
after sorghum malt was used to replace barley malt. The Nigerian beer industry currently 
uses about 200 000 tonnes of sorghum each y ear to make beer malt (RMRDC, 1996). No 
attempt has yet been made to prepare beer malt from dried cassava roots produced in 
southern Nigeria where most of the beer i ndustries are based. However, biochemists at 
the National Root Crops Research Institute (NRCRI) believe that given the right enzyme, 
it is possible to prepare beer malt from drie d cassava roots. The manager of the Golden 
Guinea Brewery, Umuahia believes that c onsumers would accept cassava malt beer 
judging from their ready acceptance of sor ghum beer in the mid 1980s. However, the 
manager reported that Golden Guinea would be reluctant to invest in research on making 
beer malt from cassava roots because patent la w is not enforced in Nigeria. Research is 
needed to develop the technology for making beer malt from dried cassava roots. 
The third potential for cassava as an industria l raw material is a cassava-based alcohol 
industry. Currently, Nigeria imports about 90 million litres of alcohol annually with about 
80 million litres being used by the liquor industry. If the 80 million litres were produced 
from cassava, it would require 500 000 tonne s of dried cassava roots which would 
increase the demand for cassava, raise farm in come, generate on-farm and off-farm jobs 
and save foreign exchange. However, a cassava-based ethanol industry should be of more 
help to other cassava producing countries that import petroleum because Nigeria is 
subsidizing the retail price of gasoline. A feasibility study should be carried out to 
determine the economics of a cassava-based alcohol industry in Nigeria and a cassava-
based ethanol industry in other African cassava producing countries that import 
petroleum. 
7 IMPLICATIONS OF THE CASSAVA TRANSFORMATION FOR 
ENVIRONMENT, GENDER, POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND 
EQUITY 
7.1 ENVIRONMENT 
Historically, many scholars have asserted that  cassava depletes the soil. For example, 
Hendershott, et al.,  reported that cassava is well known not only for producing large 
quantities of carbohydrate, but also for exhausting the soil (1972, p.60). Similar 
assertions have been made by Davesne (1950), Irvine (1953) and Grace (1977). Soil 
fertility is a subject of major importance in  a discussion of expanding food production in 
Africa (IITA, 1998). Human-induced land degrad ation is severe in Africa. Numerous 
researchers claim that a lack of replenishment of nutrients is leading to rapid deterioration 
in soil fertility. Fertilizer use is low because of  high transport costs, late delivery and the 
risks associated with food production in marginal areas (Pinstrup-Anderson et al., 2000). 
To test the hypothesis that cassava depletes  the soil, COSCA researchers collected soil 
samples from 1 501 fields planted with st aple crops in 281 villages in the cassava 
growing areas of the Congo, Côte  d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. The 
soil samples collected over the 1991 to 1992 peri od revealed that the amount of clay, silt 
and sand did not differ between cassava fields and the levels found in the fields of other 
crops20. In fact, soils of cassava fields were higher in total N, organic matter, Ca, Na, 
TEB, ECEC and pH21. 
A twenty-year cassava yield-experiment c onducted by S. K. Hahn at IITA's high rainfall 
station at Ibadan in the transition zone from the early 1970s until the early 1990s found 
that the yield dropped significantly from an average of 40 tonnes per ha during the first 
four years and then stabilized at around 20 tonne s per ha from the fifth to the twentieth 
year. Cassava was grown every other year in a two-year rotation without chemical 
fertilizer. Hahn concluded that cassava produ ces a large amount of foliage which is 
recycled as manure to the soil. Hahn's la ndmark twenty-year study shows that cassava 
yields are sustainable under continuous cu ltivation. The COSCA soil survey and Hahn's 
twenty-year yield experiment provide evidence that the assertion that cassava depletes the 
soil is a half-truth. 
The myth of cassava being a soil depleting crop may be attributed to the fact that cassava 
is widely grown in the forest zone wher e high rainfall and sandy soil accelerate organic 
matter decomposition, leaching and soil erosion at a faster rate than in the transition and 
the savannah zones22. For example, an eight-year experime nt in the forest zone of Ghana 
revealed that cassava yields declined unde r a continuous rotation of cassava and maize 
with fertilizer. In the transition zone, a sim ilar experiment was carried out without the 
application of fertilizer and cassava yields declin ed but at a slower rate than in the forest 
zone (Nye and Greenland, 1960 cited in Odurukwe and Oji, 1981). 
The myth of cassava as a soil degrader has b een used to downgrade cassava's role as an 
environmentally friendly crop. Cassava cultiv ation entails minimal soil disturbance 
especially in light soils which are suscep tible to wind or water erosion. Cassava is 
normally grown on flat land in sandy soils and on ridges and mounds on heavy lateritic 
soils (Hahn, 1984). The plant provides soil cover so long as it grows; as a semi-perennial 
it does not shed all its leaves with senescence.  As a semi-perennial, cassava plants serve 
as a planted fallow. Although there are pl aces, especially high population density and 
market centre areas, where cassava is harveste d from six to 12 months after planting, the 
normal time of harvest is 12 months or more. The cassava plant protects the soil by 
providing cover and recycles nutrients by shedding old leaves as it grows. 
To summarize, in Africa, increased production of cassava will not lead to environmental 
degradation because contrary to conventiona l wisdom, cassava does not deplete the soil 
more than any other crop. Cassava is often grown on flat seedbed with minimum tillage. 
It produces a large amount of foliage which is recycled as soil nutrient. As a semi-
perennial crop, cassava provides year-round soil cover. 
20 The physical soil properties assessed are clay, silt and sand c ontent. The chemical properties are total nitrogen (Total 
N), organic matter (OM), available phosphorous (Available P), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), potassium (K), sodium 
(Na) and manganese (Mn) contents; total exchangeable bases (TEB), total exchangeable acidity (TEA), effective cation 
exchange capacity (ECEC), base saturation and soil pH. For more details see Asadu and Nweke, 1999. 
21 Several of the fields have been under continuous cultivation of cassava for a minimum of a decade. 
7.2 GENDER 
Cassava has been described as a women' s crop by some scholars (Ikpi, 1989 and 1989a 
and Okorji, 1983). For example, Okorji (1983) found in the Abakaliki area of southeast 
Nigeria that women owned more cassava fields  than men and concluded that cassava is a 
women's crop. COSCA researchers collected da ta from six countries and found that the 
categorization of cassava as a women's crop is  a misleading half-truth that is based on 
anecdotal evidence and isolated village studies. 
The COSCA studies show that the proporti on of the household cassava field area 
(hereafter field) owned by women ranged from  4 percent in the Congo to 24 percent in 
Côte d'lvoire23. By contrast, the proportion of cassava fields owned by men ranged from 
15 percent in Côte d'lvoire to 72 percent in  Uganda and 81 percent in Nigeria. Joint 
ownership by both men and women account for the balance of the percentages in each 
country. 
There is an important exception in tree crop-dominated rural economies. Among the six 
COSCA countries, women in Côte d'lvoire  owned a higher proportion of the cassava 
fields than men. In Côte d'lvoire and in most other tree crop dominant-farming systems, 
the men concentrate on producing tree crops su ch as cocoa and coffee. Hence, although 
there are specific locations in certain countri es where women owned more cassava fields 
than men (Okorji, 1983 and Ezumah and Domenico, 1995), these locations are exceptions 
and not the norm. 
The COSCA studies found that both men and women make significant contributions of 
their labour to the cassava industry in most  of the COSCA countries. However, men and 
women were found to specialize in different  tasks. Men worked predominantly on land 
clearing, ploughing and planting while wome n specialized in weeding, harvesting, 
transporting and processing (Figure 3). 
22 Unpublished data from S. K. Hahn, IITA, lbadan. 
23 The agro-ecological zones of these countries include hum id forest (hereafter the forest) zone, forest-savannah 
transition (hereafter the transition zone) zone and the moist savannah (hereafter th e savannah) zone. The forest zone is 
characterized by 9–12 months of growing season, more than 22°C daily mean temperature and less than 10°C 
temperature range. The transition zone is  characterized by five to seven mont hs of growing season, above 22°C daily 
mean temperature and above 10°C temperature range. The savanna h zone is characterized by three or four months of 
growing season, above 22°C daily mean temperature and above 10°C temperature range (Carter and Jones, 1989). 
Figure 3. Percentage of cassava fields in which men, women, or men and women 
together, provided the bulk of labour for different tasks, average for six COSCA 
study countries 
 
Women were found to contribute less than half  of the total labour inputs in the cassava 
system in five of the six COSCA study countries (Nweke et al., 2001). The exception was 
the Congo. Therefore, it is a vast overstatement to categorize cassava as a woman's crop. 
In fact, both men and women play strate gic but changing roles during the cassava 
transformation process. As cassava becomes a cash crop produced primarily for urban 
centres, men increase their labour contributi on to each of the production and processing 
tasks. For example, the proportion of the ca ssava weeding carried out by men was higher 
in Nigeria than in Tanzania because in Ni geria, cassava is produced as a cash crop for 
urban consumption and in Tanzania, it is a famine-reserve crop (Nweke et al., 2001). 
The COSCA studies found that the introduction of labour-saving technologies in cassava 
production and processing has led to a redefi nition of gender roles in the cassava food 
system. In Nigeria, on farms where land clearing or ploughing was mechanized, men 
increased their labour inputs in planting, weeding and harvesting. In Nigeria, as the 
processing tasks became mechanized, the c ontribution of male labour to cassava 
processing increased because men operated all of the processing machines. When 
processing became mechanized, women shifted their labour to production tasks such as 
weeding and men managed the mechanized processing tasks. 
The last two observations of the COSCA study challenge the validity of the claim that 
women's workload increases relative to me n's as commercialization of agriculture 
proceeds. 
The COSCA studies also found that women who wanted to plant cassava were not 
constrained by the lack of access to new cassa va production technologies or to essential 
production inputs such as farmland, planting cuttings of the TMS varieties and hired 
labour. Both men and women were able to pl ant cassava on land that they had inherited, 
purchased or rented. Finally, although most of the cassava processing machines were 
owned by men in most of the COSCA count ries, both men and women had access to the 
machines by paying a fee to the machine owners. 
The COSCA studies show that the assertion th at cassava is a women's crop in Africa is 
not valid because men are more important in terms of the ownership of cassava fields. 
The myth is also rejected because in term s of work in cassava fields, women do not 
produce more cassava than men in most of the COSCA studied households. 
What are the policy implications that flow from these observations? Although there are 
persistent calls by donor agencies and gender experts on African policy-makers to hire 
more female agricultural extension workers in cassava growing areas, COSCA research 
shows that both men and women play signifi cant and changing roles in the cassava food 
system in Africa. 
Country specific studies are needed to determ ine appropriate policy measures for use of 
cassava to improve the welfare of men and wo men in Africa. For example, in Ghana and 
Nigeria where cassava is produced as a cash crop, more men are staying in the villages 
and working in cassava production and gari processing. Similarly, in the Congo, men are 
also staying in tree crop-producing v illages and working on cassava for home 
consumption because they earn higher cas h income from tree crops than from 
employment in urban areas. Outside the tr ee crop areas, young men migrate out of the 
Congolese villages to escape rural poverty. Wome n are therefore left to produce food for 
their families under conditions of extreme rural poverty. 
The solution to poverty and low returns to both men and women engaged in cassava 
production and processing is to take a holistic  approach and introduce improved varieties 
and processing technologies to improve the economic returns of cassava production and 
processing and drive down the real (inflation adjusted) price of cassava in rural and urban 
markets. 
7.3 POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 
Historically, cassava has been a subsistence crop when 90 to 95 percent of the people in 
Africa were in farming. Today, although only half  to two-thirds of the people of Africa 
live in rural areas, there is still a myth that ca ssava is primarily a subsistence crop that is 
grown for home consumption by farmers a nd rural net food buyers. The increasing 
urbanization and consumer demand for convenient food products in Africa has stimulated 
the urban demand for cassava products such as gari and attieke. To meet the expansion in 
demand, cassava has emerged in many countries  as an important cash crop for farmers 
and as an urban food staple. 
The percentages of cassava fields planted for sale in the six COSCA countries were as 
follows: the Congo, 59; Côte d'lvoire, 51; Gh ana, 57; Nigeria, 45; Tanzania, 32; and 
Uganda, 25. In the Congo, the proportion of cassa va planted for sale was higher than for 
any other crop (Tollens, 1992). In Nigeria, the Congo and elsewhere, there are small-
scale farms that produce 5–10 ha of cassava entirely for sale (Berry, 1993). 
Table 7 shows that cassava is an important  source of farm income in the COSCA study 
countries, but particularly in Ghana and Nigeria. In both Ghana and Nigeria, cassava cash 
incomes were the highest among farms with  access to mechanized cassava processing 
equipment for the preparation of gari. The contribution of cassava to farm incomes was 
found to be low in Tanzania and Uganda because the majority of farmers in both 
countries lacked access to improved cassava processing equipment. In the COSCA study 
countries, cash income from cassava accrued to  more households than cash income from 
any other food crop, confirming the relatively eg alitarian spread of benefits from the 
production of cassava (Table 8). 
The COSCA data from 281 villages in th e six most important cassava producing 
countries in Africa dismiss the myth that cassava is a subsistence crop produced by and 
for rural households. Cassava is increasingly being transformed into a cash crop that is 
produced and marketed as an urban food st aple in many countries in Africa. This 
discussion illustrates the need for measures to increase the productivity of the cassava 
food system in order to raise the income of  farmers and those involved in processing and 
marketing and reduce the real cost of cassava for consumers over time. 
8 CHALLENGES AND STRATEGIES FOR DEVELOPMENT 
Increasing the productivity of the cassava food system can help both the rural and urban 
poor by driving down real (inflation-adjusted) cassava prices over time. However, since 
Africa's independence in the 1960s, cassava has been neglected by African policy-makers 
and international donor and development ag encies because cassava is erroneously 
considered an inferior food, the consumption of which will decline if incomes increase in 
Africa. It is now time to focus sustained African and donor attention on the entire cassava 
production and utilization system and develop action plans to accelerate the cassava 
transformation. The solution to poverty and lo w returns to the men and women engaged 
in cassava production and processing is to c oncentrate on introducing improved varieties, 
agronomic practices, labour-saving harvesti ng and processing technologies and finding 
new industrial uses for cassava. There is a n eed to remove subsidies on imported rice and 
wheat in order to provide a level playing field for cassava in the food system. 
Table 7. Percentage distribution of cash income of cassava producing households by 
source in Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda, 1992 
Source Côte d'lvoire Ghana Nigeria Tanzania Uganda 
Cash Income Per capita (US$) 114 108 177 51 48 
  Percentage 
Food crops 15 55 55 16 28 
Cassava 5 13 12 4 6 
Maize 2 13 8 3 8 
Source Côte d'lvoire Ghana Nigeria Tanzania Uganda 
Rice 5 3 6 2 2 
Yam 1 5 8 0 0 
Cooking banana 0 0 0 3 2 
Plantain 2 4 1 0 1 
Sweet potato 0 0 1 0 2 
Other food crops 0 17 19 4 7 
Other crops* 76 21 20 25 11 
Livestock 3 3 7 4 7 
Non-farm 6 21 18 55 54 
Total 100 100 100 100 100 
US$ 1 = 266 CFA; 430 Cedi; 17 Naira; 285 Tsh.; 1 118 Ush 
* Other crops means industrial crops such as cotton, etc. and tree crops such as cocoa, coffee, oil palm, etc. 
Source: COSCA study 
Table 8. Percentage of COSCA study households which earned cash income from 
food crops in the Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda 
Crop Côte d'lvoire Ghana Nigeria Tanzania Uganda 
  Percentage 
Cassava 39 73 40 22 42 
Maize 27 63 35 16 31 
Rice 13 11 17 1 0 
Yam 13 43 24 0 4 
Cooking banana 1 3 0 9 13 
Plantain 26 33 15 0 0 
Sweet potato 1 1 7 6 18 
Source: COSCA study 
Without question, increased cassava production is a powerful but incomplete engine of 
rural economic growth. The fuel that drives the cassava transformation is the introduction 
of biological and mechanical technologies coupled with institutional innovations and 
balanced food policies. The introduction of new technology creates new bottlenecks 
which have to be broken by further innova tions and changes in policies. Several 
examples illustrate this substitution process at  work. The spread of the TMS varieties in 
Nigeria has shifted the labour constraint from the production to the harvesting task. The 
biological control of the mealybug shifted the control programme to the green spider mite 
and to the Ugandan variant of the mosaic  disease. Likewise, the substitution of 
mechanized for hand grating has shifted the labour constraint to peeling. The lack of 
knowledge of the gari preparation technology has restricted its use in the Congo, 
Tanzania and Uganda. Finally, the lack of  the knowledge of how to prepare cassava 
leaves has prevented consumers in Côte d'lvoire, Ghana, Nigeria and Uganda from taking 
advantage of the nutritional value of the cassava leaves in their diets. 
The TMS story illustrates the substitution pr ocess at play. The TMS varieties have 
boosted yield by 40 percent without fertilizer application. Cassava producers in Nigeria 
are demanding mechanized harvesting t echnology to reduce the harvesting labour 
bottleneck created by the high yield of the TM S varieties. The TMS varieties attain a 
maximum yield in 15 months after planting but commercial farmers in Nigeria are 
demanding varieties that will achieve a maximum yield in 12 months or less in order that 
they can practice continuous cultivation of cassava. 
To address the new bottlenecks that emerge with the cassava transformation, research and 
diffusion should be broadened beyond plant breeding and plant protection to include the 
following: 
• the development and diffusion of labou r-saving technologies for harvesting 
cassava; 
• the development and diffusion of labour-saving methods for peeling cassava; 
• development of the market pulls for cassava by improving roads; 
• development of industrial uses for cassava; 
• the diffusion of labour-saving cassava grating technologies to regions and 
countries where such technologies do not exist; 
• the diffusion of gari preparation methods to regions and countries where such 
methods do not exist; 
• the diffusion of methods to prepare cassava  leaves in regions and countries where 
such methods do not exist; 
• an in-depth study of industrial uses fo r cassava in the major cassava producing 
countries in Africa. 
Country specific cassava transformation strategies are needed because the role of cassava 
varies significantly among African countries  depending on the country's stage in the 
cassava transformation, cultural factors, agro-ecologies and market opportunities. This 
variation will determine whether cassava im provement strategies should emphasize one 
or more of the above-mentioned measures. 
Table 9 identifies challenges for the six COSC A study countries that are consistent with 
the cassava sector development in each country. In both Ghana and Nigeria, the 
development of labour-saving mechanical harv esters and peelers will help make cassava 
more competitive with food grains in urban markets and with other plant starches that are 
used in livestock feed and as raw materials in  industries. Also cassava varieties that can 
attain a maximum yield in less than twelve months will enable commercial farmers to 
grow cassava under continuous cultivation. To  utilize the expanded production from the 
TMS varieties and improved agronomic practi ces, both Ghana and Nigeria need to more 
aggressively pursue new uses for cassava. International donor agencies should finance 
projects to develop new cassava food products and industrial uses such as preparing dried 
cassava roots malt for beer brewing, cassava syrup concentrate for soft drinks, small-
scale cassava-based alcohol/ethanol production and manufacturing and utilizing cassava 
starch. 
Table 9. Country specific challenges for cassava sector development 
Country Policy Challenges 
Genetic Research, Plant 
Protection, Agronomic 
Practices and TMS 
Diffusion 
Food Preparation and 
Processing 
- Develop varieties that attain 
a maximum yield in less 
than 12 months 
- Develop labour-saving method 
for toasting gari 
Nigeria - Research and development 
support for increasing the 
use of cassava in industry 
- Develop labour-saving 
technology for cassava 
harvesting 
- Diffuse the cassava leaves 
preparation method 
- Develop varieties that attain 
maximum yield in less than 
12 months 
- Develop labour-saving method 
for toasting gari 
- TMS multiplication and 
diffusion 
Ghana - Research and development 
support for increasing the 
use of cassava in industry 
- Develop labour-saving 
technology for cassava 
harvesting 
- Diffuse the cassava leaves 
preparation method 
- TMS multiplication and 
diffusion 
- Diffuse gari preparation 
methods 
- - Diffuse mechanized grater 
technology 
Uganda - Research and development 
support for increasing the 
use of cassava in industry 
 
Develop labour-saving 
technology for cassava 
harvesting - Diffuse the cassava leaves 
preparation method 
- TMS multiplication and 
diffusion 
Côte 
d'lvoire 
- Eliminate subsidies on 
imported rice and wheat 
- Develop labour-saving 
technology for cassava 
harvesting 
- Develop a grater that is suitable 
for attieke processing Diffuse 
the cassava leaves preparation 
method 
- Diffuse gari preparation 
methods 
Tanzania - Improve road access to 
urban market centres   
- Diffuse the mechanized grater 
technology 
- Improve civil stability - Diffuse gari preparation 
method 
- Road access to urban 
market centres 
Congo 
- Eliminate import subsidies 
on rice and wheat 
  - Diffuse the mechanized grater 
technology 
Source: Nweke et al. 2001 
In Uganda, research, government, NGOs and donor agencies are struggling with the 
devastating cassava mosaic disease by introduc ing the TMS varieties. TMS varieties are 
reported to be spreading and farmers ar e getting higher yields (World Bank, 2001). 
Government, NGOs and international donor ag encies in Uganda should continue to 
address disease control. The diffusion of garb preparation methods and the mechanized 
grater should be promoted because they can reduce processing costs and expand the 
urban demand for cassava. NGOs and donor ag encies should support a pilot project on 
using cassava as a raw material in beer malt, syrup concentrate for soft drinks and ethanol 
industries as well as development of the ca ssava starch as a raw material for other 
industries. 
In Côte d'lvoire, the “market pull” of cassava can be increased by eliminating the 
subsidies on imported rice and wheat. A grater for making attieke needs to be developed 
to reduce the cost of a product which has a strong urban demand. In Tanzania, maize is 
the preferred staple and cassava is a famine-reserve crop. The diffusion of the gari 
preparation technology and the mechanized grat er can help cassava compete in the urban 
market. International donor agencies should support pilot activities to find non-food uses 
for cassava. In the Congo, increasing market pull by improving roads and the removal of 
subsidies on imported rice and wheat will help  cassava farmers tap new rural and urban 
markets. 
The survey of industrial uses for cassava  in Nigeria that was undertaken by COSCA 
researchers in early 2001 should be supplemented with an in-depth study of industrial 
uses for cassava in the major cassava producing countries in Africa. 
REFERENCES 
Alyanak, Leyla.  1997. A modest grater means safer and quicker cassava in Uganda. 
News Highlights. News/1997/970508-e.rtf. FAO, Rome. 
Asadu, C.L.A. & Nweke, Felix, I.  1998. The soils of cassava-growing areas in sub-
Saharan Africa. COSCA Working Paper N o. 18. Collaborative Study of Cassava in 
Africa, IITA, Ibadan. 
Berry, S.S.  1993. Socioeconomic aspects of cassa va cultivation and use in Africa: 
Implication for the development of a ppropriate technology. COSCA Working Paper 
No. 8. Collaborative Study of Cassava in Africa, IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Blackie, Malcolm, J.  1990. “Maize, Food Self-sufficiency and Policy in East and 
Southern Africa.” Food Policy 15:383–394, October. 
Bokanga, M. & Tewe, O.O. 1998. Cassava: A premium raw material for the food, feed 
and industrial sectors in Africa. Pa ges 54–60 in Post-harvest technology and 
commodity marketing. Proceedings of a pos t-harvest conference, 2 November to 1 
December 1995, Accra, Ghana by R.S.B. Ferris (editor). IITA, Ibadan. 
Boserup, Ester.  1981. Population and  Technological Change: A Study of Long-Term 
Trends . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Byerlee, Derek & Eicher, Carl, K. (eds).  1997. Africa's Emerging Maize Revolution. 
Lynne Rienner, Boulder, London. 
Carter, S.E. & Jones, P.G.  1989. COSCA site selection procedure. COSCA Working 
Paper No 2. Collaborative Study of Cassava in Africa, IITA, Ibadan. 
Dahniya, M.T.  1983. Evaluation of cassava leaf a nd root production in Sierra Leone. 
Proceedings of the International Society for Tropical Root Crops, Lima. 
Davesne, A. 1950. Manual d'agriculture (Paris). 
Delfloor, Isabelle. 1995. Factors governing the bread-mak ing potential of cassava flour 
in wheatless bread recipes. Ph.D. dissertation, Katholieke University, Leuven. 
Eggleston, G. & Omoaka, P.  1994. Alternative breads from cassava flour. Pages 243 to 
248 in Tropical root crops in a devel oping economy by F. Ofori and S.K. Hahn 
(editors). Proceedings of the Ninth Sym posium of the International Society for 
Tropical Root Crops, 20–26 October 1991, Accra,  Ghana. International Institute of 
Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan. 
Enete, Anselm, Nweke, Felix, I. & Okorjim Eugene, C.  1995. Trends in food crops 
yields under demographic pressure in sub- Saharan Africa: The case of cassava in 
southeast Nigeria. Outlook on Agriculture. Volume 24, No. 4. pp. 249–254. 
Ezemenari, Kene, Nweke, Felix I. & Strauss, John.  1998. Consumption patterns and 
expenditure elasticity of demand for food st aples in rural Africa: Focus on cassava 
growing area. Draft COSCA Working Pape r, Collaborative Study of Cassava in 
Africa. IITA, Ibadan. 
Ezumah, N.N. & Domenico, C.M.D.  1995. Enhancing the role of women in crop 
production: A case study of Igbo women in  Nigeria. World Development 23(10): 
1731–44. 
Fresco, L.  1986. Cassava in shifting cultivation: a systems approach to agricultural 
technology development in Africa: Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. 
Grace, M.R. 1977. Cassava processing. FAO Plant Pr oduction and Protection Series No. 
3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
Graffham, Andrew & Westby, Andrew.  1999. Cassava Chips, global opportunities, 
case study: Ghana. Pages 130–136 in Global cassava market study: Business 
opportunities for the use of cassava (dTp Studies Inc.). The Global Development 
Cassava Strategy Validation Forum, 28 April 2000, FAO, Rome. 
Hahn, S.K.  1984. Tropical root crops: Their impr ovement and utilization. Conference 
Paper 2. IITA, Ibadan. 
Hahn, S.K. 1989. An overview of African traditiona l cassava processing and utilization. 
Outlook on Agriculture 18(3): 110–118. 
Harrison, B.D., Liu, Y.L., Zhou, X., Robinson, D.J., Calvert, L., Munoz, C. & Otem-
Nape, G.W.  1997. Properties, differentiation and geographical distribution of 
geminiviruses that cause cassava mosaic di sease. African Journal of Root and Tuber 
Crops. Volume 2 (1 and 2). Pages 19–22. In ternational Society for Tropical Root 
Crops - African Branch (ISTRC-AB). Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Hendershott, C.H., et al.  (eds.)  1972. A Literature Review and Research 
Recommendations on Cassava, Manihot esculent a, Crantz, University of Georgia, 
Athens, Georgia, USA. 
Herren, H.R., Neuenschwander, P., Hennessey, R.D. & Hammond, W.N.O.  1987. 
Introduction and dispersal of Epidinocarisi lopezi  (Hym. Encytidae), an exotic 
parastoid of cassava mealybug, Phenococcus manihoti  (Horn. Pseudococcidae) in 
Africa. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environments. Volume. 19. Pp.131–144. 
IF AD (International Fund for Agricult ural Development) and FAO (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations).  2000. The world cassava 
economy: Facts and outlook. Rome. 31 pp. 
IITA (International Institute of Tropical Agriculture).  1998. IITA (International 
Institute of Tropical Agriculture) Annua l Report and Research Highlights for 1987–
88. IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria. 161 pages. 
Ikpi, Anthony  E. 1989. Cassava development in Nigeria. Pages 1–15 in Cassava: 
Lifeline for the rural households. Edited by Anthony E. Ikpi and Nathalie D. Hahn. 
UNICEF, Lagos. 
Ikpi, Anthony E. 1989a. Economic considerations of cassava development. Pages 117 – 
125 in Cassava: Lifeline for the rural hous eholds. Edited by Anthony E. Ikpi and 
Nathalie D. Hahn. UNICEF, Lagos. 
Irvine, F.R. 1953. A text book of West Africa agriculture, soils and crops. London. 
Jones, W.O.  1959. Manioc in Africa. Food Research Institute, Stanford University, 
Stanford, USA. 
Lagemann, J.  1977. Traditional African farming syst ems in Eastern Nigeria. African 
Studies. 98. Weltforum Verlag. Munchen. 
Latham, M.C. 1979. Human Nutrition in Tropical Africa, FAO, Rome. 
Lutaladio, N.B. & Ezumah, H.C.  undated. Cassava leaf harvesting in Zaire (Congo). 
M'vuazi. 
McCalla, Alex, F.  1999. Prospects for food security in the twenty-first century: with 
special emphasis on Africa. Agricultural Economics 20(95–103). 
Mellor, John, W., Delgado, C. & Blackie, M. eds., 1987. Accelerating Food Production 
in Sub-Saharan Africa  . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Keys: 
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
Nweke, Felix, I., Spencer, Dunstan, S. & Lynam, John, K.  2001. The Cassava 
Transformation: Africa's best kept secret. Michigan State University Press, East 
Lansing. 
Nye, P.H. & Greenland, D.J.  1960. The soil under shifting cultivation. Herpenden, 
England, Commonwealth Bureau of Soils, Tech. Comm. 51. 
Odurukwe, S.O. & Oji, U.I.  1981. The effects of previous  cropping on yields of yam, 
cassava and maize. Pages 116–119 in Tropical Root Crops: Research Strategies for 
the 1980s. Proceedings of the First Triennial Symposium of the International Society 
for Tropical Root Crops - African Branch (ISTRC-AB), 8–12 September 1980, 
Ibadan, Nigeria. International Development Research Centre, Ottawa. 
Okigbo, Bede, N.  1980. Nutritional implications of pr ojects giving high priority to the 
production of staples of low nutritive qua lity. The case of cassava in the humid 
tropics of West Africa. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 2(4). United Nations University, 
Tokyo. 
Okigbo, Bede, N.  1984. Improved permanent production systems as alternative to 
shifting intermittent cultivation. Page 1–100 in Improved production systems as an 
alternative to shifting cultivation. F AO Soils Bulletin 53. Soils Resources 
Management and Conservation Service, Land and Water Development Division, 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy. 
Okorji, E.C. 1983. Consequences for agricultural productivity of crop stereotyping along 
sex lines: a case study of four villages in Abakaliki area of Anambra state. M.Sc. 
thesis, Department of Agricultural Econom ics, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, 
Nigeria. 
Onabolu, A., Abass, A. & Bokanga, M.  1998. New food products from cassava. 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, 40 pp. 
Onwueme, I.C. 1978. The tropical tuber crops. John Wiley and Sons, New York, USA. 
Otim-Nape, G.W. 1995. Personal communication. 
Otim-Nape, G.W., Bua, A., Thresh, J.M., Baguma, Y., Ogwal, S., Ssemakula, G.N., 
Acola, G., Byabakama, B., Colvin, J.B., Cooter, R.J. & Martin, A.  2000. The 
current pandemic of cassava mosaic virus disease in East Africa and its control. 
Chatham, UK Natural Resources Institute. 
Otoo, John & Afuakwa, J.J. 2001. Email message, February 27. 
Pinstrup-Anderson, Per, Pandya-Lorch, P. & Rosegrant, Mark, W.  1999. World 
food prospects: Critical issues for the early twenty-first century. 2020 Vision, Food 
Policy Report, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D. C. 
Ratanawaraha, C, Senanarong, N. & Suriyapan, P.  1999. Status of cassava in 
Thailand: Implications for future research and development. The Global Cassava 
Development Strategy Validation Forum. FAO, Rome. 
RMRDC (Raw Materials Research  and Development Council).  1996. Update on 
techno-economic survey of the multi-disc iplinary task force on textile, weaving 
apparel and leather sector. RMRDC, Abuja. 
Rossel, H.W., Changa, CM. & Atiri, G.I.  1994. Quantification of resistance to African 
cassava mosaic virus (ACMV) in IITA improved mosaic-resistant cassava breeding 
materials. Pages 280–287 in Food crops for food security in Africa, edited by M.O. 
Akoroda. Proceedings of the Fifth Triennial  Symposium of the International Society 
of Tropical Root Crops-Africa Br anch (ISTRC-AB). 22–28 November 1992. 
ISTRC/CTA/IITA. Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Satin, M. 1988. Bread without wheat. New Scientist. 28 April. Pp. 56–59. 
Scott, Gregory, J., Rosegrant, Mark W. & Ringler, Claudia.  2000. Roots and tubers 
for the 21st century: Trends, projections and policy options. Food, Agriculture and 
Environment Discussion Paper 31, International Food Policy Research Institute 
(IFPRI), Washington D.C. 
Spencer and Associates, Dunstan.  1997. Cassava in Africa: Past, present and future. 
The Global Cassava Development Strategy Validation Forum, FAO, Rome. 
Tewe, O.O. & Bokanga, M. 2001, Unpublished data. 
Tollens, E. 1992. Cassava marketing in Zaire - an an alysis of its structure, conduct and 
performance. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium (Mimeograph). 
Vilpoux, Olivier & Ospina, Marco Tulio.  1999. Cassava foods, global opportunities, 
case study: Brazil. Pages 12–24 in Globa l cassava market study: Business 
opportunities for the use of cassava (dTp Studies Inc.). The Global Development 
Cassava Strategy Validation Forum, 28 April 2000, FAO, Rome. 
World Bank.  1999. World development re port, 1999/2000. The World Bank, 
Washington D.C. 
World Bank.  2000. Women: Key to African development. News Release No: 
2000/340/AFR. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 
Yaninek, J.S. 1994. Cassava plant protection in Africa. Pages 26–37 in Food crops for 
food security in Africa, edited by M.O. A koroda. Proceedings of the Fifth Triennial 
Symposium of the International Society for Tropical Root Crops-Africa Branch 
ISTRC-AB, ISTRIC/CTA/IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria. 
CASSAVA IN AFRICA: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 
Prepared by 
Dunstan Spencer and associates 
Sierra Leone 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Cassava was introduced to Africa by the Portuguese during the late 16 th century. It was 
readily adaptable to the different environmental conditions and well suited for integration 
into the farming systems and socioeconomic conditions of Africa. The crop is grown in 
African countries, stretching from the Island of  Madagascar in the southeast to Senegal 
and the Cape Verde Islands in the northwest. 
At a time when a variety of approaches to  poverty alleviation are being considered by 
governments in the developing world and their development partners, increased attention 
is being paid to the potential of cassava as a food security, as well as a cash crop. For full 
potential of the crop to materialize, there is general agreement that there is a need for a 
global strategy for cassava development (IF AD, 1996). The strategy should highlight the 
national and global perspectives related to markets and end products, as well as 
achievements and lessons learned from deve lopments so far. It would indicate the 
prospects for substantial public and private investment programmes and include a 
research agenda. 
The International Fund for Agricultural Devel opment (IFAD) is playing a leading role in 
the development of the strategy. A number of  country case studies, regional reviews and 
cross-cutting thematic studies are being unde rtaken to provide the necessary building 
blocks for the global strategy. The Internati onal Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) 
has the responsibility of preparing the regional review for sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). 
1.1 OBJECTIVES OF THE REGIONAL REVIEW 
The purpose of this review is to analyse th e trends of cassava production and utilization 
and identify constraints to and opportunities fo r, the development of cassava in Africa. 
The study will identify and quantify the most significant trends in the region. It will 
provide a bridge between the country case st udies and the thematic reviews. Building on 
existing data the review attempts to presen t a picture of how the crop is affected by 
policies and how it will develop in the future  in terms of its contribution to poverty 
alleviation, equity, food security and environm ental impact, with a view to developing a 
set of priorities for future action. 
1.2 SOURCES OF DATA 
The review uses a commodity production-consumption framework for its analysis. It is 
based solely on secondary data. Production a nd trade statistics are from the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Na tions (FAO), as contained in the World 
Agricultural Trade Indicators (WATI) and othe r databases. Although for some variables 
these statistics are not altogether reliable, they provide the only consistent global statistics 
for analyses of trends. 
Most of the data used for analyses of ch aracteristics of the commodity are from the 
Collaborative Study of Cassava in Africa (COS CA) database, in IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria 
and the Environmentally Sustainable Cassava  Plant Protection (ESCaPP) database in 
IITA, Cotonou, Benin,. Published material fr om COSCA and regional cassava research 
and development networks have also provided useful information. 
COSCA began in 1989 in six countries, namely Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, 
Uganda and Zaire and later expanded to  include Benin,, Burundi, Cameroon, Kenya, 
Malawi, Rwanda and Zambia. These countries  include all the cassava growing agro-
ecological zones, demographic and climatic conditions that influence cassava production 
and consumption in sub-Saharan Africa. Th e study was executed in three phases. The 
first was a broad characterization of the environment (physical, social, economic), 
production, processing, marketing and consump tion situation. The second phase dealt in 
more detail with yield, land area, crop utiliza tion (sale or home use, processed or fresh 
use) and input/output relationships, etc. The third phase involved detailed studies on post-
harvest issues such as characterizati on of processing techniques, product quality 
assessment (nutrition, toxicity, quality), marketing, consumption and demand. 
Villages in COSCA were statistically se lected using a stratified random sampling 
technique of cassava growing areas (Carte r and Jones, 1989), based on climate, human 
population density and market infrastructure. In Phase I, group interviews of farmers 
were conducted by national agricultural research  scientists in each of the countries. In 
Phase II field surveys were conducted during which fields were measured and yields 
estimated using 20 m 2 or 40 m 2 plots. Phase III surveys were conducted at the household 
level. Male and female household member s were interviewed using structured 
questionnaires. 
ESCaPP data collection was carried out in  four countries, namely Benin, Cameroon, 
Ghana and Nigeria. Data collection methodol ogies were similar to those of COSCA, 
although they focused more on plant health management issues. 
1.3 OUTLINE OF THE REPORT 
The next section of the review briefly de scribes the cassava production to consumption 
system, sketching out the main elements that should be covered in a review. In Section III 
cassava production trends are examined, focusing on changes in area under cultivation, 
yield, resources used by farmers and constraints that they face. In S ection IV the role of 
cassava as a food security crop is exam ined, followed by an assessment of the 
environmental effects of the crop in Section V.  The sixth section discusses infrastructure 
and product markets, focusing on access to ma rkets and post-harvest technologies and 
processes. Section VII addresses the role and progress in research and extension systems. 
The final section presents the major conclusi ons for the future development of the crop, 
including the identification of research issues. 
2 THE CASSAVA SYSTEM 
Figure 1 presents a schematic representation of the cassava production to consumption 
system in sub-Saharan Africa. Over 90 per cent of production takes place in small farms. 
Inputs cover the whole spectrum for agricu ltural production in Africa. Imported inputs 
consist of small hand tools used by small-scale farmers, tractors, machinery, fertilizer and 
other agricultural chemicals, used mainly by medium- and large-scale farmers. 
Large-scale agro-industries, which produce fe rtilizer, agricultural chemicals and farm 
production machinery (tractors, ploughs, etc.) are widespread in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Small-scale and artisan agro-industries that produce hand tools and processing machinery 
are more important in the cassava system and provide a link to the industrial sector. 
Roots are transported by head load, as well a by trailers and small trucks, where the road 
network allows them to be used. Cassava r oots are processed into a wide variety of 
products for human and industrial consum ption, ranging from simple boiling, to 
fermented products and beverages. Most of the products are consumed domestically 
within the countries in which they are produ ced. However, there is a small but growing 
export trade in dried cassava chips and other industrial products. 
Agricultural policies affect the cassava system at different stages and in different ways. 
The system contributes significantly to em ployment creation and income generation. It 
has an impact on the environment and its development will be affected by infrastructure 
constraints especially the state of the rural road network. 
Each of the components of the systems and the processes that affect them are discussed in 
other sections of this report. 
Figure 1. The cassava production to consumption system in sub-Saharan Africa