# Weather and Climate Manual for Agriculture
# publisher: Ghana Meteorological Agency (GMet) with AICCRA/CGIAR
# year: 2022
# url: https://cgspace.cgiar.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/3cb7b779-cd15-4643-b999-148a021a45c6/content
# attribution: Ghana Meteorological Agency, Weather and Climate Manual for Agriculture (2022)
# ghana_specific: True
# extent: 36 pages
# CAVEAT: Uses the pre-2018 ten-region names. Brong Ahafo has since been split into Bono, Bono East and Ahafo; Western North, Oti, Savannah, North East and Ahafo did not exist when this was written. Its rainfall figures for the Coastal Savannah differ from FAO's.
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

Weather /Climate Manual 
for Agriculture 
 
 
Authors: Francisca Martey 
Ghana Meteorological Agency  
 
 
AICCRA Ghana Report 2022 
 
2 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
Correct citation to this document: 
 Francisca Martey (2022). Weather and Climate Manual for Agriculture. Accelerating Impacts of CGIAR 
Climate Research for Africa (AICCRA) Training Manual. 
 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
SOME USEFUL DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………………………..3  
THE VARIOUS SYNOPTIC STATIONS IN GHANA……………………………………...7 
THE ATMOSPHERE …………………………………………………………………………………8 
THE WEATHER………………………………………………………………………...……………10 
COMPONENTS OF WEATHER………………………………………………………...……..13 
WEST AFRICAN MONSOON…………………………………………………………….........21 
CLIMATE TYPES ACROSS THE WORLD…………………………………………….……..22 
WEATHER PATTERNS IN GHANA…………………………………………………….……..22 
PRESSURE AND MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE………………………………….…....24 
SEASONS…………………………………………………………………………………...............25 
THE RAINY (WET) SEASON……………………………………………………………..........25 
THE DRY (HARMATTAN) SEASON………………………………………………………….26 
CLIMATE AND AGRICULTURE…………………………………………………….………….26 
FARMING SYSTEMS IN GHANA………………………………………………………....... 28 
EFFECT OF WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGES ON AGRICULTURE……... 31 
CROP CALENDAR IN GHANA………………………………………………………...………33 
GROWING SEASON IN GHANA…………………………………………………….……….34 
REFERENCES……………………………………………………………………………..............38 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
SOME USEFUL DEFINITIONS 
 
WATER VAPOR - It is the gaseous state of water and it's often invisible to the human eye. 
DEW POINT - It refers to the temperature that air needs to be cooled (at constant pressure) to reach a 
relative humidity of 100%. At this point, the air is fully saturated and cannot hold any more water vapor. 
When the air temperature matches the dew point, the air is as saturated as it can be without 
condensation forming. 
DOWNPOUR - It is the sudden and unexpected heavy fall of rain. 
RAINFALL AMOUNT - It is the amount of pr ecipitation in the form of rain (water droplets from the 
clouds) that descends onto the surface of the Earth, either on land or waters. 
MIST - It is a cloud of tiny water droplets suspended in the atmosphere at or near the Earth' s surface 
that limits visibility (to a lesser extent than fog; strictly with visibility remaining above 1km). 
FOG - It is a thick cloud of tiny water droplets suspended in the atmosphere at or near the Eart h's 
surface which obscures or restricts visibility (to a greater extent than most; strictly reducing visiting to 
below 1km). 
DEW - It is a water in the form of droplets that appears on thin exposed objects in the morning or 
evening due to condensation. As the exposed surface cools by radiating its heat, atmospheric moisture 
condenses at a  rate greater than that at which it can evaporate, resulting in the formation of water 
droplets. 
AEROSOL - It is a suspension of tiny particles or droplets in air such as dust or fumes. 
EVAPORATION - It is the process of turning liquid into a gas. 
CONDENSATION - It is  the process where water vapor becomes liquid. It is actually the reverse of 
evaporation.  
CONCENTRATION - It refers to the amount of substance in a defined space. 
SATURATION - It is a physical and chemical state where a system can take no more. 
CESSATION OF RAINFALL - This is a period that is characterized by the end of rainfall in a year, this 
also means the scanty few days of rainfall which may occasionally occur. 
ONSET OF RAINFALL - It can be described as the possible start of rainfall in a year.   
 
CLIMATE ZONE - These are areas with distinct climates. These zones might correspond to weather 
patterns, latitude, or communities of plants and animals. C limate zones can even help farmers and 
 
4 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
gardeners understand which plants will grow best in their area. So, in Ghana our agro-ecological zones 
help farmers to know the kind of crop to plant at a specific geographical location and what to expect at 
a particular time of the year in respect to the climate. 
PROBABILITY - Chance of a weather occurring. 
VISIBILITY - How far ahead one can see. 
PRECIPITATION - Weather in the form of Rain, snow, hail, drizzle, showers. 
THUNDERSTORM - Series of thunder usually accompanied by rain or hail 
ISOLATED - The weather is expected over few areas. Usually less than a quarter of the area 
SCATTERED - More than a quarter of the area will be affected by the weather but less than half. 
WIDESPREAD - The weather is expected over  more areas, usually more than half of the area u nder 
consideration. 
INTERMITTENT - A weather that is expected to occur in aggregates (not continuous) but could last for 
a long period of time. 
OCCASIONAL - The weather is expected to occur some times within the day. 
GUST - It is an occasional increase in wind speed 
PREVAILING WEATHER - The weather that is dominating an area at a time. 
SLIGHT, MODERATE, HEAVY -Tells the intensity of the weather. The least is slight, followed by moderate 
and the highest is heavy. 
SQUALL - A line of intense thunder. 
DRY - Less amount of moisture in the atmosphere. 
MOSTLY CLOUDY - More cloud than sun. 
FEW CLOUDS - More sun than clouds. 
CLEAR SKY - No cloud in the sky 
OVERCAST - Entire sky covered with cloud 
FAIR WEATHER - Weather void of rain, thunder 
UNSTABLE ATMOSPHERE - Atmosphere favourable for cloud formation and/or precipitation. 
HAZE - Weather that causes obscuration in a relatively dry atmosphere. 
STRONG/WEAK - used to describe the intensity of a weather condition. 
 
5 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
PARTLY CLOUDY - An atmosphere with cloud and sun existing together. 
WINDY - Strong winds persisting for a period of time. 
STORM - rain that comes with strong winds. 
PERIODIC - Weather condition that will occur during some times within the day. 
CLIMATE VARIABILITY - It refers to variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as standard 
deviations, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scale beyond 
that of the individual weather events. 
AGROMETEOROLOGY - It is an abbreviated from agricultural meteoro logy, put s the science of 
meteorology to the service of agriculture, in its various forms and facets, to help with the sensible use 
of land, to accelerate the production of food, and to avoid the irreversible abuse of land resources  
AGROCLIMATOLOGY - It is the study of climate an d its effect on agriculture. It mainly  deals with the 
interaction between climatological and hydrological factors. Its main aim is to apply climatological 
information for the purpos e of improving farming practices and increasing a gricultural productivity 
both in ter ms of quantity and quality. Even though agrometeorology and agroclimatology deal with 
almost similar fields, they differ in their approach as agrometeorology mainly deals with weather 
forecasting dealing with daily problems, while the agroclimatology deals with the use of mean data as 
a guide to long range planning. 
SYNOPTIC WEATHER STATIONS - They collect meteorological information at synoptic time 00h00, 
06h00, 12h00, 18h00(UTC) and at intermediate synoptic hours 03h00, 09h00, 15h00, 21h00(UTC). The 
instruments used for gathering t he information at the stations are the anemometer, wind vane, 
pressure sensor, thermometer, hygrometer and rain gauge. The purpose of the synoptic observations 
includes mapping large scale weather systems (in real time and for climatology) and also to provide the 
basis needed for proper analysis and verification of operational weather models. 
 
6 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
                           THE VARIOUS SYNOPTIC STATIONS IN GHANA 
 
 
  
Figure 1: The above image shows the various synoptic stations in Ghana 

 
7 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
THE ATMOSPHERE 
 
Our planet's atmosphere is a layer of gases that surrounds it and is held in place by gravity and its own 
weight. Gases like Nitrogen (78%), oxygen (21) and other percent gases, make up the atmosphere. The 
Atmosphere shields life on Earth from harmf ul ultraviolet (UV) radiation, insulates the plan et to 
maintain a comfortable temperature, and limits the extremes of day and night.  
The atmosphere is made of four layers namely; Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere, 
Thermosphere and Exosphere in their respective increase other of height. 
 
TROPOSPHERE 
The lowest layer of the atmosphere, the troposphere, is located about 9 km above Earth's surface and 
contains the majority of the atmosphere's mass (about 75–80%).  
• The majority of weather-related activities occur in the troposphere.  
• We are located in this layer, which also contains all other living things.  
• The majority of the gases in the atmosphere are found in the troposphere.  
• In this layer, temperature falls with height.  
 
STRATOSPHERE  
Most of the ozo ne in the atmosphere is found in this second laye r, which is the second layer of t he 
atmospheric. The temperature rises vertically in this layer. The UV light from the sun is absorbed by the 
ozone in this layer, preventing it from reaching the Earth's surface.  
From the tropopause, it spreads out by around 10 to 30 kilometers (layer between the troposphere and 
the stratosphere).  
MESOSPHERE  
Between 30 and 50 km above the stratosphere, this layer of the atmosphere is relatively large.  
At the mesopause, temperatures drop with height to a minimum of roughly -90 degrees Celsius (layer 
separating the mesosphere and the thermosphere).  
THERMOSPHERE  
Due to the sun's powerful ultraviolet and x-ray light being absorbed, the thermosphere is a layer of the 
atmosphere where temperature rises with height. It is loca ted between 50 and 400 kilometers above 
the mesopause.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
EXOSPHERE  
This layer of the atmosphere is the bottom one and is primarily made up of oxygen and hydrogen 
atoms. It is located above the thermosphere at a distance of around 400 km.  
 
 
A DIAGRAM SHOWING THE LAYERS OF THE ATMOSPHERE 
 
 
  
Figure 2: The layers of the atmosphere. 

 
9 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
THE WEATHER 
 
We shall focus on the troposphere, which is where the majority of our weather-related activities occur, 
from the upper layers of the atmosphere. The variet y of activities that take place daily in our 
atmosphere make up the weat her. Because of the dynamic nature o f the atmosphere, the weather 
varies across the globe and changes over the course of a few minutes, hours, days, and weeks.  
Air temperature, atmospheric pressure, humidity, precipitation, solar ra diation, wind, and clou diness 
are just a few of the variables that make up the weather. 
A meteorologist measures and examines these meteorological variables in order to forecast or 
anticipate the weather. The type of air mass affects weather as well.  
AIR MASSES 
Air masses are generally a parcel of air with uniform temperature and humidity moving in the same 
direction. An air mass is known based on their source of origin  
TYPES OF AIR MASSES 
• Tropical continental air mass 
• Tropical maritime air mass 
• Polar continental air mass 
• Polar maritime air mass 
• Arctic maritime air mass 
• Returning polar maritime air mass 
Because we are taking of our weather and climate our concentration will on tropical continental and 
tropical maritime. These are the two types of air masses that have impact on our climate. 
PROPERTIES OF AN AIR MASS 
 All air masses have the following properties: 
• Temperature 
• Moisture content 
• Stability 
• Weather 
• Visibility 
• Change of lapse rate 
 
 
 
 
10 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
TROPICAL CONTINENTAL 
This particular air mass is primarily resp onsible for the countr y's dry se ason, often known as the 
Harmattan season.  It is accompanied by a great deal of dust, which causes the atmosphere to become 
quite dry. Visibility is also moderate to poor, an d the temperature rises quickly with a steady 
atmosphere. The Sahara Desert in North Africa is where these air masses originated.  
 
TROPICAL MARITIME 
This kind of air mass blows across the nation from the sea. It typically comes with chilly temperatures, an 
unstable atmosphere, good visibility, and moist, rainy weather.  
 
 WHAT IS WEATHER 
Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere at a particular place. Weather can also be referred to as the 
short-term changes in the atmosphere. 
 
WHAT IS CLIMATE 
Climate refers to the long-term state of the atmosphere at a particular place at a particular time. Climate 
describes what the weather is like over a long period of time in a specific area. 
 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN WEATHER AND CLIMATE 
WEATHER CLIMATE 
1.Weather refers to the short-term changes in the 
atmosphere. 
  1.Climate refers to the long-term state of the 
atmosphere. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Weather affects only a small geographical area.  2. Climate affects a large geographical area. 
3. Weather is what you get. 3. Climate is what you expect to happen in some 
years to come. 
 
11 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
WHAT CAUSES WEATHER 
Weather is made up to 6 m ain components namely temperature, atmospheric pressure, cloud formation, 
wind, humidity and precipitation. The atmosphere is dynamic so is the weather and any slightest change in 
any of the aforementioned components can change the pattern of the weather. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For instance, we could be experiencing a fair and clear weather in the morning but in the afternoon, there 
can be heavy rains with thundering and lightening. The weather keeps on changing due to smallest change 
in any of the weather components. These weather components are measured, analyzed and forecasted by 
meteorologist to give awareness to the general public to know the state of the atmosphere. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: An Image Showing the Variations of Temperature 
 
12 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
COMPONENTS OF WEATHER 
 
 
1. TEMPERATURE 
 
Temperature is the main param eter which determines or defines the stability of the atmosphere. 
Temperature basically describes how hot or cold a body or an object is. Temperature decreases with  
altitude in the troposphere. The atmosphere absorbs energy from the sun and this makes the air at the 
surface rise and then cool and condense. It then forms clouds and later fall as rain. 
Since air mass brings about the weather change, the temperature of the air mass will determine the kind 
of weather we will be experiencing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:The above showing the Atmosphere Factors. 
 
13 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
2. ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE 
This is an indicator of the weather. Atmospheric pressure generally refers to the weight of the air. Air 
masses move from high pressure zone to a low-pressure zone.   
 
LOW PRESSURE SYSTEM 
Low pressure systems are normally found in the 1012mb to 1000mb isobars. For low pressure zones, 
the winds move inward in a circular motion from a high-pressure zone and it normally rotates  in an 
anticlockwise direction in the Northern hemisphere. In low pressure systems, the air is lighter than the 
surrounding air masses and so rises causing an unstable environment. This rising air makes water vapor 
in the air condense and form clouds which fall as rain. This is what causes active weather like the rains, 
winds(whirlwind,) and severe weather conditions such as cyclones, tornadoes, hurricanes, typhoons. It 
is also associated with clouds and precipitation that minimize temperature change throughout the day. 
HIGH PRESSURE SYSTEM 
High pressure means the air is heavy and it sinks. Sinking air makes the environment very stable. Under 
high pressure, you can expect sunny skies and calm weather. High pressure systems lead to anticyclones 
were the winds rotates in the clockwise direction. The winds blow out of the s ystem to a low-pressure 
system. High pressure systems have descending air/winds which reduces the formation of clouds and 
leads to light winds and settled weather conditions. High pressures are mostly from 1016mb to 1050mb 
isobars.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5:The above image shows Low Pressure System and High-Pressure System respective. 
 
14 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
HUMIDITY 
 
Humidity is t he measure of the amount of water vapor present in the atmosphere. Water can be 
solid(ice), liquid(water) or gas(vapor). The vapor components make up to about 99% of all the water held 
in the atmosphere. Humidity has an important influence on our atmosphere affecting water vapor and 
rainfall. 
When there's a lot of water vapor present in the atmosphere (air), humidity is high and the higher the 
humidity, the wetter it feels outside. Humidity is greatly influenced by temperature so the more water 
evaporates in a given area, the more water vapor rises into the atmosphere (air), and the higher the 
humidity of that area. Hot places or areas tend to be more humid than cool places because heat causes 
water to evaporate faster. For instance, a fixed quantity of water vapor will result in higher humidity in 
cool air and it will be in warm air. Plus, as the temperature increases so does the amount of water vapor 
required to reach saturation. 
Humidity is measured in three main ways or methods; absolute, relative and specific humidity. 
ABSOLUTE HUMIDITY (A.H) 
Absolute humidity refers to the concentration (amount) of water vapor in the air, regardless of 
temperature. This on scientific terms is the most accurate measurement of humidity since the amount 
of water vapor in th e air directly determine humidity. It is measured in grams of moisture per cubic 
meter of air (g/m³). 
 
RELATIVE HUMIDITY (R.H) 
Relative humidity refers to the concentration (amount) of water vapor in the air, compared to how much 
it could hold at that temp erature. Its value is expressed in percentage (%). For instance, R.H of 50% 
means the air is holding one half of the water vapor it can hold while a R.H of  100% means the air is 
totally saturated with water vapor and c an't hold any more water (it has reach ed the dew point). This 
also means that (100% R.H) the air is so moist that a mist or dew could form.  
The higher the temperature the more water vapor air can hold. However, a R.H of 0% means that the air 
is totally dry but R.H of 0% is impossible in the a tmosphere we find ourselves in ( i.e. the troposphere) 
because air always contain Sr amount of water vapor. R.H is metric most commonly used in weather 
reports, as it's an indicator of the likelihood of precipitation, dew, mist and fog. 
 
SPECIFIC HUMIDITY (S.H) 
 
Specific humidity refers to the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the mass of moist air. S.H is used for 
very precise calculations. 
 
 
15 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
NOTE: The method of reporting humidity is considered "relative" because it doesn't actually measure how 
much water vapor is in the air relative to how much that volume of air can hold. So, the closer the dew point 
is to 100%, the more humid the air feels. The instrument used in measuring humidity is the hygrometer. 
 
 
 
3. CLOUD FORMATION 
 
 
Figure 6: The image shows the various types of clouds at their various height 
 
Clouds are made up of water droplets or ice crystals that are so small and light and are able to stay up in 
the air. Clouds are made in different ways but same process of lifting of air; 
• some clouds form when air warms up near the Earth's surface and rises. Heated by the sun, the 
ground heats the air just above it. Then warm air starts to rise because when warm, it is lighter and 
less dense than the surrounding air.  
As it rises, it's pressure and temperature drops causing water vapor to condense. Eventually, enough 
moisture will condense out of the air to form a cloud. Several t ypes of clouds form in this way 
including cumulus, cumulonimbus, mammatus and stratocumulus clouds 
 
• some also form when wind blows into the side of a mountain range or other terrain and is forced 
upwards, higher in the atmosphere. This process can also hap pen without a mountain range, just 
when air travels over land that slopes upward and is forced to rise.  

 
16 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
The air cools as it rises and eventually clouds forms. Most clouds that are formed are lenticular 
stratus clouds but other clouds such as cumulus clouds can be formed above mountains too as air 
is warmed at the ground and rises. 
 
• clouds are also formed when air  is forced upwards at areas of low pressure. Winds meet and 
converge at the center of a low-pressure system and have nowhere to go but up.  All types of clouds 
are formed by these processes especially altocumulus, altostratus, cirrocumulus, stratocumulus and 
stratus clouds. 
 
• We also have the weather fronts, where two large air masses of air collide at the Earth's surface, this 
form clouds by causing the air to rise. For the weather fronts we have warm and cold fronts; 
 
 
• At a warm front, a warm air mass slide over a cold air mass, the warm air is pushed upward forming 
many different types of clouds, from low stratus clouds to a mid -level altocumulus and altostratus 
clouds to high cirrus, cirrocumul us and cirrostratus c louds. Clouds that produce rains like 
nimbostratus and cumulonimbus are also common at warm fronts. 
 
• At cold front where a heavy cold air mass pushes a warm air mass upward, cumulus cloud s are 
common. They often grow into cumulonimbus clouds, which produce s thun derstorms. 
Nimbostratus, stratocumulus and stratus clouds can also form at a cold front. 
 
 
4. PRECIPITATION 
 
Precipitation is any liquid or frozen water that forms in the atmosphere and falls to the Earth. It comes in 
many forms like rain, sleet, hails and snow. It forms in the clouds when water vapor condenses into bigger 
and bigger droplets of water. Then when the drops are heavy enough, they fall to the Earth like any of the 
above forms. 
 
FORMATION OF PRECIPITATION 
 
When water vapor condenses into increasing-sized droplets of water, precipitation develops in the clouds. 
The drips hit the Earth when they are heavy enough. 
Water droplets may freeze to create ice in clouds if the tempera ture is lower, as it would be at higher 
altitudes. Depending on the  cloud's internal temperature and the Earth 's surface temperature, these ice 
 
17 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
crystals subsequently descend to the Earth as snow, hail, or rain. Most rain actually starts as snow in the 
clouds, high up. Raindrops form as snowflakes pass through warmer air.  
Precipitation requires smoke or dust parti cles in the atmosphere. These "condensation nuclei" serve as a 
surface on which water vapor can condense. This encourages water droplets to congregate and enlarge until 
they are large enough to fall to the ground.  
Even if the water came from the ocean, pr ecipitation is always fresh water. This is so because water does 
not cause sea salt to evaporate. However, occasionally, airborne toxins can pollu te water droplets before 
they fall to the ground. Acid rain is the term for the precipitation that arises from this. 
Although it does not directly injure people, acid rain can increase the acidity of lakes and streams. 
Because plants and animals frequently cannot adjust to the acidity, this damages aquatic ecosystem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7:The above image shows the various types of precipitation we have. 
 
18 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
 
 
 
5. WINDS 
 
 
Wind is the movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the Earth by the sun and the Earth's own 
rotation. It cannot be seen or held but it's force can be felt. Wind is a gre at equalizer if the atmosphere; 
transporting heat, moisture, pollutants and dust to a great distance around the globe. Winds occur because 
of the horizontal and vertical differences (gradients) in atmospheric pressure, the distribution of winds is 
closed related to that of pressure. Near the Earth's surface, winds generally flow around regions of relatively 
low and high pressure -cyclones and anticyclones respectively. Winds play a significant role in determining 
and controlling climate and weather. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8:The image shows the direction and force of a wind. 
 
19 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
WEST AFRICAN MONSOON 
 
The West African monsoon is a major wind system that impacts parts of West Africa between latitudes 9° 
and 20° N. It is distinguished by winds that blow southwesterly in the summer and northeasterly in the 
winter. The West African monsoon is the surface harmattan and southwesterly wind alternation. Only south 
westerlies occur farther south, but north easterlies are constantly present farther north. 
 
The West African summer monsoon is characterized by a large-scale inflow of warm, very humid, 
conditionally and convectively unstable air streams from the equatorial Atlantic across the entire sub region 
from March to October/November. It is generally a period of widespread and prolonged precipitation. 
 
The West African winter monsoon is a similar large-scale flow but in the reverse direction i.e. from land to 
the ocean from the subtropical (Sahara) high -pressure system. Unlike the summer component, the winter 
monsoon is a period of near total dryness. It is also the period of the harmattan 
 
The West African monsoon winds have a significant influence on Ghana's tropical climate. The seasons and 
height hide the temperature variations, which are generally warm. The northern region of the country 
usually experiences just one rainy season, whi ch lasts from May until September. There are t wo rainy 
seasons in Southern Ghana: a main one from April to July and a lesser one from September to November.  
WEATHER PATTERNS IN GHANA 
 
In the wetter center and south of Ghana, rains usually fall in April, m ay, and June, with a brief respite from 
July to August. There is then a shorter rainy season in September, October and first half of November. In the 
more desert-like north, the rains arrive from March to September. But thanks to the dry earth, when the 
rain does fall it can cause terrible flooding and block roads in the north. 
 
 How can it be raining on one spot, but not be raining on a spot that is a couple meters away? This is because 
the rain has stop somewhere. The cloud producing the rain is not infinite. It covers a specific area, so it won’t 
be raining outside it. Logic would suggest that you are at the edge of a rain-bearing cloud. Everything has an 
end to it. 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
CLIMATE TYPES ACROSS THE WORLD 
 
There are approximately five main climate types on Earth:  
• Tropical  
• Dry  
• Temperate  
• Continental  
• Polar  
A: Tropical. In this hot and humid zone, the average temperatures are greater than 64°F (18°C) year-round 
and there is more than 59 inches of precipitation each year. 
B: Dry. These climate zones are so dry because moisture is rapidly evaporated from the air and there is very 
little precipitation.  
C: Temperate. In this zone, there are typically warm and humid summers with thunderstorms and mild 
winters.  
D. Continental. These regions have warm to cool summers a nd very cold winters. In the winter, this zone  
can experience snowstorms, strong winds, and very cold temperatures —sometimes falling below -22°F (-
30°C)!  
E: Polar. In the polar climate zones, it’s extremely cold. Even in summer, the temperatures here neve r go 
higher than 50°F (10°C)! 
THE CLIMATE TYPE IN GHANA 
 
The West African monsoon winds have a significant impact on Ghana's tropical climate. The seasons and 
elevation hide the fluctuating temperatures, which are generally warm.  
 
INTER-TROPICAL CONVERGENCE ZONE (ITCZ) 
The ITCZ appears as a band of  clouds consisting of showers with occasional thunderstorms that encircles 
the globe near the equator. It is also a narrow zone where trade winds of two hemispheres collide (meet) 
which causes erratic weather patterns with stagnant calms. It is caused by the convergence of northeast and 
southeast trade winds (tropical continental and tropical maritime winds respectively) in the area encircling 
Earth near the equator.  
 
It is basically a low pressure belt encirclin g Earth near the equator. It's a zone betwee n the northern and 
southern hemispheres where winds blowing equator -ward from the mid latitude and winds flowing 
 
21 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
poleward from the tropics meet. It shifts from north and east seasonally according to the movement of the 
sun. It is generally characterized by convective activities which generates often vigorous thunderstorms over 
large areas. It's is most active over continental land masses by day and relatively less active over the ocean. 
 

 
22 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
PRESSURE AND MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE 
 
Pressure is “cumulative force per unit area” du e to milli ons of gas molecules which are bouncing off the 
“sides” of any container. However, Earth’s atmosphere has no “container” but is a 360-degree shell 
completely surrounding the globe. So net force of gas molecules appears as surface “pressure”. The average 
force is called a BAR and daily variations due to ripples in force are in “millibars”.  
 
Absolute pressure -  The actual pressure at a given position is called the absolute pressure, and it is 
measured relative to absolute vacuum (i.e., absolute zero pressure). 
         
Gage pressure -  Gage pressure is the pressure relative to the atmospheric pressure. In other words, 
how much above or below is the pressure with respect to the atmospheric pressure. 
 
Vacuum pressure -  Pressures below atmospheric pressure is called vacuum pressures and are measured 
by vacuum gages that indicate the difference between the atmospheric pressure and 
the absolute pressure. 
 
Atmospheric pressure -  The atmospheric pressure is the pressure that an area experiences due to the 
force exerted by the atmosphere. The atmospheric pressure at mean sea level, 
either directly measured or, most commonly, empirically determined from the 
observed station pressure.  
In regions w here the earth's surface is above sea level,  it i s standard 
observational practice to reduce the observed surface pressure to the value 
that would exist at a point at sea level directly below if air of a temperature 
corresponding to that actually present at the surface were present all the way 
down to sea level.  
In actual pr actice, the mean temperature for the preceding 12 hours is 
employed, rather than the current temperature. This "reduction of pressure to 
sea level" is responsible for many anomalies in the pressure field in 
mountainous areas on the surface synoptic chart. 
 
Mean sea level pressure -   
 This is the pressure reading most commonly used by meteorologists to track weather systems at the 
surface. Like altimeter setting, it is a "reduced" pressure which uses observed conditions rather than 
"standard" conditions to remove the effects of elevation from pressure readings.  
 
23 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
This reduction estimates the pressure that would exist at sea level at a point directly below the station 
using a temperature pr ofile based on temperatures that actually exis t at the station. In practice the 
temperature used in the reduction is a mean temperature for the preceding twelve hours.  
Mean sea level pressure should be used with caution at high elevations as temperatures can have a 
very profound effect on the reduced  pressures, sometimes giving rise to fictitious pressure patterns 
and anomalous mean sea level pressure values. 
SEASONS 
 
Ghana is located in the tropics and we are strongly influenced by the West Africa Monsoon  winds (WAM). 
Our season is basically depende nt on the position of the I TCZ and from the diagram above we can notice 
that the is beneath the country or is at the coast in January and by July it is above the country. Ghana has 
two seasons; dry season (the harmattan) and wet season (rainy). 
 
THE RAINY (WET) SEASON 
The northern part of the country usually records one main rainy season which begins in March and ends in 
November. Squalls usually occur in the northern part of Ghana during March and April which is followed by 
occasional rain until August, S eptember, and somewhere mid-October when the rainfall reaches its peak. 
The northern part has a relatively shorter rainy season of about six months, and therefore only one cropping 
season.  
In the southern part of Ghana, there is a prolonged rainy season as a result creating two cropping seasons 
in most places. The southern experiences the major and the minor rainy seasons. The major rainy season 
starts from April and ends in July then they experience some little dryness in August. Heavy rainfall is usually 
observed and recorded in June to July where most parts of the southern gets flooded and causes a lot of 
destruction and damages to properties and there is sometimes loss of life. The minor rainy season starts 
from September to mid-November. The minor rainy season doesn't usually cause flooding compared to the 
major rainy season. 
In short, the rainy season last from March to mid-October in the north, from April to October in the central 
belt and from April to November in the south. 
 
THE DRY (HARMATTAN) SEASON 
The dry season starts from mid-November to March in Ghana. The harmattan wind blows from the Sahara 
from mid-November or early December through to March. During this period, there are more dust in the 
atmosphere with less humidity. Visibility is very bad in the harmattan season l. The northern part of Ghana 
experience more of the harmattan than the southern part of Ghana due to their closeness to the Sahara 
Desert. 
 
24 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
CLIMATE AND AGRICULTURE 
 
Agriculture is an e conomic activity that produ ce food  necessary for human livelihood and it is highly 
dependent upon weather and climate; however, agriculture is also likely to be very vulnerable to climate 
variability and change. Climate variability and climate change are t he main causes of stress on  food 
production and availability. Depending on the level of development, roughly 20 to 80 percent of the inter -
annual variability of yields is caused by the change in weather and 5 to 10 percent of national agricultural 
production is lost annually due to weather variability. Chronic losses and indirect negative effect such as 
diseases, pests and so on exceed by far the effects of extreme climate events. In fact, production losses due 
to pest, diseases and weeds are estimated at 2 6 to 30 percent for sugar b eet, barley, soybean, wheat and 
cotton, and about 35 to 40 percent for maize, potatoes and rice respectively. However, post-harvest losses 
are also of the same order of magnitude. At the same time, climate should be considered as  a "resource" 
and not merel y as a hazard. If reso urces are to be used in a sustainable way, they must be assessed in 
quantitative terms and properly managed. 
 
Solar radiation, rainfall and temperature conditions are the primary production potential and together with 
mineral nutrition and management they influence the attainable production. The main factors determining 
the availability of agricultural products at the local level (farm, village) are environmental conditions and 
management. The environment cov ers biophysical factors ( i.e. weather, climate, p ests, soil, water, land 
availability, etc.) while management involves decisions taken by the farmers themselves. Decisions related 
to these management practices can be made in response to the weather to opti mize the production or 
minimize the risk of farming systems. Climate information is generally used for for planning the crop season 
and for making strategic decisions such as defining the crop, the variety, planting date, total water demand 
for irrigation and other weather informations on the other hand is used for operational decision as in 
knowing the exact date to plant based on soil water content, whether to make an application, anticipated 
harvest (in case of forecast of rainfall), irrigation management and others.  
Exploiting climate information and serviced for decision-makers, the agriculture sector will be better placed 
to provide food for a more highly populated and increasing urban world. In today's constantly changing 
environment, farmers need accessible as well as executable climate services to adequately manage climate 
risks and exploit climate resources, so as to take advantage of favorable weather and minimize problems 
due to unfavorable weather conditions. 
 
The main factors that have the strongest influence on crop production and need to be considered are in 
particular, those that influence cr op growth and development. The two most important elements are 
temperature and water availability; in both situations daily and seasonal variations are common and 
 
25 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
temporal and spatial quantity are crucial. The agroclimate zones help with the planning of agriculture on a 
regional or national scale and should include adaptation that may be necessary due to climate variability 
and climate change. Weather and climate information amassed through observation, data and diagnostics 
can be used to assist farmers with planning their activities. 
 
AGRO-ECOLOGICAL ZONES IN GHANA 
 
An agro-ecological zone is a land resource mapping unit defined in terms of climate, landforms and soils, 
and/or landcover, and having a specific range of potentials and constraints for land use. But agro-ecological 
zoning refers to the division of an area of land into smaller units which have similar characteristics related 
to land suitability, potential production and environmental impact.  
Ghana is divided into six (6) ecological zones namely; Sudan Savannah, Guinea Savannah, Transition Zone, 
Deciduous Forest, Evergreen (moist and wet evergreen) or Rainforest and Coastal Savannah. 
 
The Guinea Savannah zone covers the whole of Upper West and Northern regions. It also occupies parts of 
Upper East region and the northern part of Brong Ahafo and Volta region. This zone has a single rainfall 
season lasting from May to October and it records an annual rainfall of about 1000mm. The Sudan Savannah 
also spreads f rom north -eastern part of Upper East regio n with an annual rainfall between 500mm to 
700mm. The Transition Zone falls within the middle portion of Brong Ahafo region, northern part of both 
Ashanti and Eastern regions and the western part of the Volta region.  
This zone experiences two rainy season s, recording an annual rainfall of about 1200mm. The Decidous 
Forest cuts across the northern part of Western region through southern Brong Ahafo, Ashanti and Eastern 
regions. It also spreads to the Volta region and most part of the Central region. It also experiences a double 
rainy season with an annual rainfall of about 1400mm been recorded.  
Most parts of the Western region are within the Evergreen Zone. It also captures a small part of Central 
region. This zone records the most annual rainfall of about 2000mm; having the same rainfall pattern as 
Transition Zone and Deciduous Forest. The Coastal Savannah also stretches from Central region through to 
Greater Accra to Volta regions. It has a single rainy season and records an annual rainfall of about 600mm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
Figure 9: shows the various agro-ecological zones in Ghana 
 
FARMING SYSTEMS IN GHANA 
 
 
 
 

 
27 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
The farming systems represent the combination of cropping and livestock activities and the r esources 
available (pedoclimatic conditions) to the farmers to raise them for their production purposes. 
The philosophy behind this approach is to secure a judicious mix of cropping system with associated 
enterprises like animal husbandry suited to the given pedo/agro climatic conditions in accord with the socio-
economic status of farmers in order to bring prosperity to the farm. In Ghana, there are about seven (7) 
different farming systems practiced by farmers and some other h ouseholds. These are arab le fa rming, 
mixed farming, subsistence cultivation, shifting cultivation, plantation farming, pastoral/livestock cultivating 
and nomadic cultivating. 
Arable farming -  is a crop production system that include different variety of crops from foliage crops. 
In this system, the land  must neither be too wet or dry and it is practiced on gently 
slope or flat lands with deep and fertile soil under a warm climate. Some crops that 
are cultivated include vegetables, plantain, cassava, grains and so on. 
Mixed farming -  is a farming method in which farmers grow crops and raise livestock on the same piece 
of land. This can be practiced in a region with great precipitation or water system 
offices. 
Plantation farming  - is when one type of crop is cultivated on a large plot of land for commercial purposes. 
Some crops practiced with is system are coconut, plantain, palm nuts, avocados, 
cassava and so on. 
Shifting cultivation  - in this system, the farmers cultivate on a piece of land for like two t o three seasons 
then abandon the land when soil loss it's fertility and plant on a different land for the 
previous land to heal. 
Nomadic cultivating -  this is similar to pastoral/livestock cultivating but this system, livestock are 
herded in order to seek for fresh pastures on which they graze and for water. 
Animals such as cow, sheep, goats, camel, ponies and jackasses are normally 
seen by herdsmen. 
Subsistence cultivation -  it is the practice of growing crops or livestock or both sufficient for one's own 
use and not for trade or business. 
Pastoral/livestock cultivating - in this system, animals are the only produce and not crops. This system 
can be used for commercial purpose or household purpose. Animals 
raise are the rabbits, grass cutter, poultry, goats and so on. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
EFFECT OF WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGES ON AGRICULTURE 
 
IMPACT ON CROP PRODUCTION 
Crop yields may be significantly impacted by changes in temperature, atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), 
and the frequency and severity of extreme weather. Depending on the crop's ideal temperature for growth 
and reproduction, an increase in temperature will have different effects on different crops. The types of 
crops that are traditionally cultivated there may benefit from warming in some areas, or farmers may b e 
able to switch to crops that are now grown in warmer regions. 
Conversely, production will decrease if the higher temperature exceeds the crop's optimal temperature.  
 
IMPACT ON LIVESTOCK 
Animals may be impacted by climatic changes both directly and indirectly. 
1. High temperatures, which a re expected to b ecome more frequent as a result of climate change, 
might seriously endanger livestock.  
2011 saw approximately $1 billion in heat -related losses for agricultural producers as a result of 
exposure to high temperature occurrences. Animals are impacted by heat stress both directly and 
indirectly. Heat stress over time can lower fertility, decrease milk production, and make people more 
susceptible to illness.  
 
2. A drought might put pasture and feed supplies at danger. 
The amount of high-quality fodder available to grazing livestock is decreased by drought. 
Due to hotter summers and less precipitation, certain locations may endure longer and more severe 
droughts. Changes in agricultural production brought on by drou ght could also cause issues for 
animals that depend on grains. 
 
3. The prevalence of illnesses and parasites that afflict livestock may rise as a result of climate change. 
Winters that are warmer and spring that arrive earlier may make it easier for some para sites and 
pathogens to survive. Increased rainfall may encourage the growth of diseases that require moisture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
CROP CALENDAR IN GHANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
30 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
GROWING SEASON IN GHANA 
 
The time of year when crops and other plants effectively develop is known as a growth seaso n. A growth 
season's length varies depending on where you live. A growth season of at least 90 days is required for most 
crops. 
The growing season might span the entire year in tropical areas where it is warm all year long.  However, a 
wet season might stop the growing season in some tropical regions. Crops cannot be grown at this time due 
to the flooding.  This kind of irregular growing season is typical of coffee, which grows in tropical 
environments. Coffee is harvested all year long in Colombia. 
Heavy downpours frequently cut short the coffee-growing season in Indonesia. 
Sometimes the climate is too dry for crops to flourish in other tropical regions. The Sahel, a tropical region 
of northern Africa, frequently endures dry spells. The Sahel is a region that lies between the savanna in the 
south and the Sahara Desert in the north. The likelihood of a successful harvest in the Sahel is quite unclear 
due to dramatic weather patterns. 
The length of the growing season in temperate countries, which have chilly win ters and mild s ummers, is 
mostly influenced by te mperature. The length of some growth seasons might reach eight months. Such 
extended growing seasons are common in Europe and the majority of America. The length of the growing 
season decreases with distance from the Equator. The growth season might be as short as two months in 
areas close to the polar regions.  
The growing season can be identified in two ways. The growing season in temperate countries is typically 
determined by the average number of days between the final spring frost and the first severe fall frost. The 
typical number of days that the temperature rises high enough for a specific crop to sprout and grow can 
also be used to calculate the growing season. The crop determines how much to measure. The temperature 
must be at least  20 degrees Cels ius for ric e to grow (68 degrees Fahrenheit). However, at just 5 degrees 
Celsius, wheat will sprout (40 degrees Fahrenheit). 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
31 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
SOME METEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS 
 
1. ANEMOMETER 
The instrument used to gauge wi nd direction an d speed is called an anemometer. I n weather 
stations, it is a typical instrument. The measurement unit for anemometer is m/s, km/hr, mph  and 
knots. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
1. BAROMETER 
Barometer is an instrument used for measuring atmospheric pressure.  The unit measured in is the 
millibar (mb).  
 
 
 

 
32 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
 
 
 
1. HYGROMETER 
A hygrometer is a device that gauges the moisture content of soil, air, or restricted spaces. 
Instruments used to measure humidity typically rely on measurements of other values, such as 
temperature, pressure, mass, and changes in a substance's mechanical or electrical properties as a 
result of absorbing moisture.  
 
 
 
 
4. THEMOMETER 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
Devices that measure temperature or a temperature gradient are known as thermometers (the degree 
of hotness or coldness of an object). Two crucial components make up a thermometer:  
(1) a temperature sensor that changes in response to changes in temperature, such as the bulb of a 
mercury-in-glass thermometer or the pyrometric sensor in an infrared thermometer; an d (2) a way to 
translate this change into a numerical value (e.g. the visible scale that is marked on a mercury -in-glass 
thermometer or the digital readout on an infrared model).  
 
5. RAIN GAUGE 
A rain gauge, also referred to by the names udometer, pluviometer, pluviometer, ombrometer, and 
hyetometer, is a tool that hydrologists and meteorologists use to collect and measure the amount of 
liquid precipitation over a certain region over time. It is used to calculate the amount of rainfall by 
measuring the depth of the precipitation (often measured in mm) that falls over a given area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. SUNSHINE RECORDER 
A sunlight recorder is a tool that captures the quantity of sunshine present in a specific area or time 
period. The outcomes offer details about a region's temperature as well as its weather and climate. 
In addition to other disciplines, meteorology, science, agriculture, and tourism all benefit from this 
knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
34 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
7. EVAPORATING PAN 
During observations to estimate the a mount of evaporati on at a certain pla ce, water  is kept in an 
evaporation pan. These pans come in a variety of sizes and shapes, with circles and squares being the 
most popular. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
35 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
REFERENCES 
 
• Roland Nuhu Issaka, Moro Mohammed Buri, Satoshi Tobita, Satoshi Nakamura and Eric Owusu-Adjei 
(February 2012): Indigenou s Fert ilizing Materials for Enhancing Soil Productivity in Ghana; Soil 
Fertility Improvement and Integrated Nutrient Management - A Global Perspective 
• Andersen, E (2010) Regional typologies of farming systems contexts. System for Environmental and 
Agricultural Modelling; Linking European Science and Society (SEAMLESS) Report. PD.4.4.3. 
• Andersen, E., Elbersen, B., Godeschalk, F., Verhoog, D. (2007) Farm management indicators and farm 
typologies as a basis for assessments in a ch anging policy environment. Journal of Environmental 
Management. 82, 353–362. 
• https://thefarmdreams.com/list-of-farming-systems-in-ghana-ultimate-guide/ 
• FAO. 2019.Handbook on Climate Information for Farming Communities - What farmers Need  and 
What is Available:pg 2-5. Rome. 184pp.Licence:CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
36 
•   
WEATHER A ND CLIMATE MANUAL FOR AGRICULTURE  
 
 
 Building on 50 years of CGIAR innovation, AICCRA works to 
scale climate-smart agriculture and climate information 
services that reach millions of smallholder farmers in Africa. 
For more information, visit us at https://aiccra.cgiar.org/  
 
AICCRA is led by: 
AICCRA is supported by the International 
Development Association of the World Bank: