# Improving Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa: Interventions and their Economic Assessment
# publisher: International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
# year: unknown
# url: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/te_1489_web.pdf
# attribution: IAEA, Improving Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa
# ghana_specific: False
# extent: 289 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

IAEA-TECDOC-1489
Improving farmyard poultry
production in Africa:
Interventions and
their economic assessment
Proceedings of a final research coordination meeting
organized by the
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
and held in Vienna, 24–28 May 2004
February 2006

IAEA-TECDOC-1489
Improving farmyard poultry
production in Africa:
Interventions and
their economic assessment
Proceedings of a final research coordination meeting
organized by the
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
and held in Vienna, 24–28 May 2004
February 2006

 
The originating Section of this publication in the IAEA was: 
Animal Protection and Health Section 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
Wagramer Strasse 5 
P.O. Box 100 
A-1400 Vienna, Austria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPROVING FARMYARD POULTRY PRODUCTION IN AFRICA:  
INTERVENTIONS AND THEIR ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT 
IAEA, VIENNA, 2006 
IAEA-TECDOC-1489 
ISBN 92–0–101206–3 
ISSN 1011–4289 
© IAEA, 2006 
Printed by the IAEA in Austria 
February 2006 
 
FOREWORD 
A major objective of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food 
and Agriculture is to support research projec ts involving nuclear and related techniques 
leading to improved animal production in deve loping countries. Chicken produced on a 
relatively small scale, at the farmyard level, are an important source of animal protein for 
human consumption in developing countries . Limiting factors to maximize this resource 
include infectious diseases  and overall production management. A Coor dinated Research 
Project on Small Scale Poultry Production was initiated in 1998 to evaluate the impact and 
cost efficacy of inputs in management and vete rinary care and provide guidelines to improve 
the livelihood of farmers. 
This publication contains the results of th e FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Project 
entitled Assessment of the Effectiveness of Vacci nation Strategies against Newcastle Disease 
(ND) and Gumboro Disease (IBR) using I mmunoassay-based Technologies for Increasing 
Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa. Thirteen research contract holders in Africa evaluated 
the major constraints to poultry production in different regions of their countries, analysed the 
disease situation, management and mark eting practises and developed improved 
ND vaccination and husbandry strategies with the support of the four research agreement 
holders. This exercise highlighted the added be nefit strategic vaccination had on the survival 
rate and the number of birds produced. A thermo stable ND-vaccine seed strain (provided by 
CSIRO, Australia) reduced the cost of vaccin ation substantially, as it could be produced 
locally, with the added advantage of being th ermo-resistant, thus reducing the need of a 
prolonged cool chain. This was further improved by the training of “village vaccinators” 
performing vaccine inoculations without the need of veterinary staff on place, insuring 
vaccination frequency. The efficacy and the le vel of protection resulting from vaccination 
were evaluated based on antibod y titres. Management of chicks  (overnight housing and creep 
feeding) for the first six weeks improved produ ction by a further 30%. The holistic approach, 
i.e. vaccination together with management strategies, improved the survival of chicks by more 
than 80%. It was also noted that women were playing an important role in the daily 
management of backyard poultry. Furthermore, IBR and fowl pox infections had an adverse 
impact on production in several lo cations, but never to the exte nt seen for ND. For these 
situations, specific prophylactic vaccination programmes were developed. The use of the 
isotope related technique ELISA for assessing disease status and vaccination protection was 
key to the success of this CRP. 
This TECDOC provides insight into the constraints faced by the informal farmyard 
chicken production sector in Africa and describes strategies to overcome these limitations. 
Lessons were learned and applied from a Banglade sh study that first identified, evaluated and 
classified factors influencing poultry produc tion before intervention. The results obtained 
through this CRP are encouraging and will cer tainly help to increase poultry production in 
general and improve the livelihoods of the rural poor. In the summary you will find the 
condensed results obtained with methods explai ned in the expert presentations. The country 
reports contain all background data. 
The FAO and IAEA wish to express their sincere appreciation to the participants of 
this CRP for their contribution to the CRP and the present publication. The IAEA officer 
responsible for this publication is H. Unger of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear 
Techniques in Food and Agriculture. 
 
EDITORIAL NOTE 
The papers in these proceedings are reproduced as submitted by the authors and have not undergone 
rigorous editorial review by the IAEA. 
The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the IAEA, the governments of the nominating 
Member States or the nominating organizations. 
The use of particular designations of countries or territories does not imply any judgement by the 
publisher, the IAEA, as to the legal status of su ch countries or territories, of their authorities and 
institutions or of the delimitation of their boundaries. 
The mention of names of specific companies or produc ts (whether or not indicated as registered) does 
not imply any intention to infringe proprietary ri ghts, nor should it be construed as an endorsement 
or recommendation on the part of the IAEA. 
The authors are responsible for having obtained the necessary permission for the IAEA to reproduce, 
translate or use material from sources already protected by copyrights. 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Summary of the results of the FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Project Assessment of  
the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle disease and  
Gumboro disease using immunoassay-based technologies for  
increasing farmyard poultry production in Africa".................................................................... 1 
R.H. Dwinger, H. Unger 
Expert Presentations 
 
 
Use of a standardized form for partial budget analyses to assess the feasibility and efficiency 
of interventions in family poultry operations in 11 African countries................................. 13 
R. Klos, C. Eisele, T. Bennett, G. Frank, B. Goodger 
Technical parameters for the assessment of scavengeable feed resource for poultry.............. 19 
E.B. Sonaiya 
Disease control strategies in the Smallholder Livestock Development Project in  
five southern districts of Bangladesh ................................................................................... 38 
J.G. Bell 
Experiences in using poultry as a tool for poverty alleviation at village level — How to 
enable poor women to increase their income ....................................................................... 42 
A. Permin, J.C. Riise, K.N. Kryger, I. Assoumane, T.W. Schou  
 
Country Reports 
 
The effect of vaccination against Newcastle Disease and feed supplementation on  
production in village chicken in Bamenda area of Cameroon ............................................ 51 
F.N. Ekue, D.K. Pone, J.M. Mafeni, A.N. Nfi, J. Njoya 
Correlation between Newcastle Disease vaccines and pesticides pollution in  
village chickens .................................................................................................................... 56 
A.H. Azzam, E.E.K. Ahmed  
Prevalence of Gumboro Disease in vaccinated and none-vaccinated village 
chickens in Egypt ................................................................................................................. 67 
A.H. Azzam, H.M.Z. Youseif, E.E.K. Ahmed  
Control of very virulent Infectious Bursal Disease (vvIBDV) in rural poultry in Egypt......... 75 
M.K. Hassan. A.H. Azzam 
Comprehensive approach to the improvement of rural poultry production in Ghana ............. 84 
J.A. Awuni, T K. Coleman, V.B. Sedor 
Comparative advantage of the use of a thermostable vaccine in the protection of rural 
chickens against Newcstle Disease in Ghana ...................................................................... 99 
J.A. Awuni, T.K. Coleman, V.B. Sedor 
Amelioration de la production en aviculture familiale: Cas de la Cote d'Ivoire ................... 107 
T. Danho, A. Kacou, S.C. Bodjo, E. Couacy-Hymann 
Assessing the economic impacts of supplementing commercial poultry feeds and vaccinating 
against Newcastle disease in local chickens, in Kenya...................................................... 116 
S.W. Njue, J.L. Kasiiti and S.G. Gacheru 
Impacts de la vaccination anti-maladie de Newcastle et du deparasitage des poussins sous 
mere sur la productivite de l'aviculture villageoise a Madagascar .................................... 125 
M. Koko; O.F. Maminiaina; J. Ravaomanana.; S.J. Rakotonindrina 
 
 
Aviculture villageoise a Madagascar: Productivite et performance de croissance ............... 137 
M. Koko; O.F. Maminiaina; J. Ravaomanana.; S.J. Rakotonindrina 
Impacts de l'amelioration de conduite sur la productivite de l'aviculture villageoise 
a Madagascar...................................................................................................................... 146 
M. Koko; O.F. Maminiaina; J. Ravaomanana; S.J. Rakotonindrina 
Aviculture villageoise à Madagascar: Enquête epidemiologique .......................................... 157 
M. Koko; O.F. Maminiaina; J. Ravaomanana.; S.J. Rakotonindrina 
The socio-economic importance of family poultry production in the  
Republic of Mauritius......................................................................................................... 164 
V.S. Jugessur, M.M. Pillay, R. Ramnauth, M.J. Allas 
Improving farmyard poultry production on smallholder farms in Mauritius......................... 179 
V.S. Jugessur, M.M. Seenevassen Pillay, M.J. Allas 
A guide to improve family poultry production in Mauritius.................................................. 201 
V.S. Jugessur, M.M. Seenevassen Pillay, M.J. Allas 
Effects of feeding, housing and antiparasitic treatments in improving free range chicken 
production in Morocco ....................................................................................................... 203 
F. Kichou, M. Bouslikhane 
Improvement of health and management of village poultry in Mozambique ....................... 216 
Q.J.P. Lobo, R.G. Alders, A. Da Silva, M. Harun 
Increasing family poultry production in the Sudan through Newcastle Disease control 
and improving housing ...................................................................................................... 220 
A.I. Khalafalla,.S.A. Abdel Aziz, S.M. ElHassan 
Observations on production, laboratory testing and field application of I-2 thermo stable 
Newcastle disease vaccine in the Sudan ........................................................................... 228 
A.I .Khalafalla, W. Hassan, M. Elnur, A.S. Ali  
The performance of village chickens in selected rural areas of Uganda, given Newcastle 
disease I-2 thermostable vaccine, Levamisole treatment and feed supplementation ........ 236 
J. Illango; M. Ocaido; G. Musisi; A. Etoori; H. Olupot; N. Mabonga 
Evaluation of health and productivity of family poultry in eastern Tanzania and the 
impact of controlling Newcastle disease............................................................................ 256 
H.M. Msami, P.N. Wambura, U.M. Minga 
Summary of five years of IAEA funded project on improvement of family poultry in  
Africa: Results and discussions.......................................................................................... 266 
H.M. Msami, P.N. Wambura, U.M. Minga   
 
List of Participants ................................................................................................................. 279 
 
SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS OF THE FAO/IAEA COORDINATED 
RESEARCH PROJECT "ASSESSMENT OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
VACCINATION STRATEGIES AGAINST NEWCASTLE DISEASE AND 
GUMBORO DISEASE USING IMMUNOASSAY-BASED TECHNOLOGIES 
FOR INCREASING FARMYARD POULTRY PRODUCTION IN AFRICA" 
R.H. DWINGER
1, H. UNGER2  
1DG Health & Consumer Protection, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium 
2Animal Production and Health Section, Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear 
Techniques in Food and Agriculture, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna  
Abstract 
In an FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Project on backyard poultry production in Africa 13 
laboratories all over this continent cooperated with seven research agreement holders to determine and 
quantify specifically limiting production factors in this economic niche. Infectious diseases and in 
particular Newcastle disease was major constraint. Lack of management practises added losses mainly 
in young birds. The introduction of a new thermostable Newcastle vaccine produced easily in eggs and 
applied by village vaccinators brought enormous economic advantages specifically where chicks were 
managed for the first month after hatching and in most locations this could double the income 
generated. 
1. INTRODUCTION  
The final Research Coordi nation Meeting (RCM) of the FAO/IAEA Coordinated 
Research Project (CRP) "Assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against 
Newcastle disease (ND) and Gumboro diseas e (IBR) using immunoassay-based technologies 
for increasing farmyard poultry production in Africa" was held at the IAEA in Vienna, 
Austria, 24–28 May 2004. The meeting ended a five-year programme and was attended by 
research contract holders from Cameroon, Egypt,  Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, 
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Sudan and Tanzania and research agreement holders from 
Bangladesh, Denmark, the Netherlands and Tanzania. Two counterparts were absent (Uganda, 
Zimbabwe). The progress and results of this CRP were discussed, as sessments of partial 
budget analyses were performed and the va rious interventions such as ND and IBR-
vaccinations, anti-parasitic treatments and improved management practices, were ranked 
according to their effectiveness. Participants all agreed that the CRP outcome would be 
beneficial to the respective national poverty alleviation programmes. 
2.  BACKGROUND 
Poultry research initiated by the Joint Division FAO/IAEA 
Initial activities 
An initial policy paper was produced by Barbara van der Eerden in 1996 that 
suggested expanding the programme of the An imal Production & Health section to include 
research activities on poultry. Two consultants, Anders Permin and Jonathan Bell, in close 
collaboration with the staff of the Animal Production & Health Section, outlined the next year 
a proposal for a research project on family pou ltry production in Africa. The research project 
was designed with a holistic approach for th e improvement of family poultry production in 
1
 
Africa. External funding was sought from vari ous donors, but proved difficult to obtain for 
geographical reasons. Most donors at the time we re concentrating their support efforts on a 
single country or a relatively small region. By  1998 the Joint FAO/IAEA Division decided to 
initiate the research on poultry using funds available through the Coordinated Research 
Programme (CRP). The unique feature of a CRP is  that with modest amounts of funds (US$ 
5000–8000 per contract holder) a number of scientists in different countries are able to initiate 
applied research on the same subject using a similar approach in a coordinated fashion. The 
results of a CRP will usually highlight th e differences and simila rities between production 
systems of uniquely dissimilar environments and management approaches. Coordination is 
facilitated by annual m eetings (called Research Coordi nation Meetings or RCM’s) where 
scientists can present and discuss the results  of research. At the same time a number of 
experts on the subject (called Research Agre ement holders) are involved in the CRP to 
provide assistance and advice during the entire length of the programme. 
Coordinated research programme on poultry 
The chief scientific investigators of the thirteen African institutes are listed in Table I 
and the geographical distribution is shown in Fig. 1.  
TABLE I. RESEARCH CONTRACT HOLDERS. 
Country Institute CSI* 
Cameroon Institut de Rech erche Agricole pour le 
Développement, Bamenda 
F. Ekue 
Côte d’Ivoire Laboratoire Ce ntral de Pathologie Animale, 
Bingerville 
T. Danho 
Egypt Animal Health Research In stitute, Cairo A. Amin/A. Azzam
Ghana Accra Vet. Lab., Accra J. Awuni 
Kenya Central Vet. La b., Kabete S. Njue 
Madagascar Departement de Recherches Zootechniques et 
Veterinaires, Antananarivo 
M. Koko 
Mauritius Agric. Res. Ext. Unit, Reduit V. Juggessur 
Morocco Institut Agron. et Vet. Hassan II, Rabat F. Kichou 
Mozambique# Instituto Nacional de Investigacao Veterinaria Q. Lobo 
Sudan Univ. of Khartoum A. Khalafalla 
Uganda Livestock Health Research Institute, Tororo J. Illango 
United Rep. of 
Tanzania 
Animal Disease Research Institute, Dar-es-
Salaam 
H. Msami 
Zimbabwe
# Central Veterinary Laboratory, Harare J. Nqindi 
* CSI = Chief scientific investigator;   
# indicates that the scientist could not participate for the entire length of the five-year programme. 
The Research Agreement holders (Table II) assisted in the design of work plans 
including the development of a standard protocol  to collect field data during the first two 
years, and gave critical comments on the annual a nd final scientific repor ts of each scientific 
investigator. 
 
 
 
2
 
TABLE II. RESEARCH AGREEMENT HOLDERS. 
Country Institute RAH* 
Denmark Royal Veterinary & Agricultural University, 
Frederiksberg 
A. Permin 
Netherlands Fort Dodge Animal Health, Weesp F. Davelaar 
Netherlands National Inspecti on Service for Livestock and 
Meat, The Hague 
R. Dwinger 
USA University of Wisconsin, Madison B. Goodger 
United Rep. of 
Tanzania 
Sokoine University, Morogoro U. Minga 
Nigeria Obafemi Awolowo University, Ife-Ife E. Sonaiya 
Bangladesh Danish International Development Agency: 
smallholder livestock development project 
J. Bell 
* RAH= Research agreement holder 
 
The Research Contract Holders receive d each year, over a five-year period, a 
moderate amount of funds to enable them to initiate applied research on family poultry 
production according to their work plans in their countries. The first two years were used to 
gather baseline data on production characteristic s of family poultry. Th e results have been 
published in 2002 as an IAEA TECDOC (Charact eristics and paramete rs of family poultry 
production in Africa, ISBN 90–5782–094–3 ). The next three years of the CRP were devoted 
to interventions in order to improve poultry production at the village level. The interventions 
included vaccination of birds against Newcastl e disease, Gumboro disease and fowl pox, 
improvements in housing and feeding strategies a nd serological monitoring in order to select 
the most suitable time for vaccination and assess the effectiveness and level of protection. 
FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Programme to improve family 
poultry production in Africa
 
FIG. 1. Map of Africa showing the countries participating in the Coordinated Research Programme 
on family poultry in Africa. 
3
 
During the five years of the programme a total of four Re search Coordination 
Meetings (RCM) were organized (Table III).  The first RCM was or ganised in Rabat, 
Morocco, and was devoted to developing a standa rd protocol for collecting baseline data in 
the various countries on family poultry produc tion. The details of the standardised data 
collection sheet are shown in Table IV. Du ring the second RCM, that was convened in 
Morogoro, United Republic of Tanzania, the results were presented and discussed and 
protocols for vaccination strategies were deve loped. It was decided to concentrate on using 
the thermostable I-2 vaccine, because it would simplify distribution to the villages since 
maintenance of the cold chain is of less impor tance. A number of investigators decided to 
compare the effectiveness of different vaccines  or applications (e.g. reports from Egypt, 
Ghana and Madagascar).  
TABLE III. DETAILS OF THE RESEARCH COORDINATION MEETINGS (RCM) HELD. 
Meeting Location Date Number of participants 
First Rabat, Morocco 8–12 February, 1999 10 RCH, 5 RAH, 3 observers 
Second Morogoro, Tanzania 4–8 Septem ber, 2000 12 RCH, 6 RAH, 8 observers 
Third Port Louis, Mauritius 4–10 May, 2002 11 RCH, 6 RAH, 3 observers 
Fourth Vienna, Austria 24–28 May, 2004 11 RCH, 5 RAH, 2 observers 
 
At the third RCM held in Mauritius, the type and details of other interventions in 
family poultry production such as feeding, housing and de-worming, were discussed 
following the presentation of the vaccination and serology results. Suitable intervention 
strategies to improve family poultry production were tailored towards each scientist’s local 
requirements and individual work plans were prepared. During the fourth and final RCM 
organised in Vienna, Austria, th e final scientific reports were discussed and refined and plans 
for future activities concerning poultry production were developed. 
TABLE IV. DETAILS OF THE STANDARD PROTOCOL USED TO COLLECT FIELD DATA ON 
THE CHARACTERISTICS AND PARAMETERS OF FAMILY POULTRY PRODUCTION. 
GUIDELINES FOR FIELD WORK 
1. Select 2 different ecological zones (maximal a two-hour drive away from the lab.). 
2. Select 3 villages in each zone. 
3. Select 4 (female) farmers, which keep family poultry, in each village.  
4. Visit the village to explain your plans (research project, interventions at a later stage 
to improve food security) to the village elders/chief. 
5. Make appointments with farmers to return at a later date for a farm visit. 
6. Test the survey in the field before use (also when you translate it in the local 
language). 
7. Use the survey when talking to the caretaker. 
8. Observe the birds and make diagnoses on the spot. 
9. Collect some (preferably fresh) faecal samples.  
10. Collect blood samples from 6 adult animals on each farm and prepare serum. 
11. Store each serum sample in two aliquots at –20ºC or –80ºC 
12. Buy the sick birds to do autopsy in the laboratory. 
13. Employ a veterinary assistant living in the village to visit the farm more often to 
provide you with additional sick/dying birds (this is obviously not possible in every 
village). 
14. Repeat the whole exercise a second time during the dry (or wet) season. 
4
 
During each of the meetings a number of observers involved in poultry research or 
related subjects were invited and managed to attend (Table V).  
TABLE V. INTERNATIONAL OBSERVERS. 
Country Institute/Organisation – City Name of Observer 
Australia University of Queens land – Brisbane P. Spradbrow 
Australia Commonwealth Sc ientific and Industrial 
Research Organization. – Melbourne 
A. Gould 
Denmark Dept. of Anthropology – Frederiksberg  M. Whyte 
Denmark Danish Internati onal Development Agency; 
poultry project – Frederiksberg 
G. Pedersen 
Italy Animal Production and Health Division, FAO, 
United Nations – Rome 
R. Branckaert/  
A. von Krogh/  
E. Guerne Bleich 
Mozambique National Vet. Research Institute – Maputo R. Alders/ M. Harun 
UK Avian Sciences Research Centre – Au chincruive T. Acamovic/ N. Sparks 
UK Veterinary Epidemiology and Economics 
Research Unit – University Reading 
R. Oakeley 
 
These scientists presented results from ot her poultry research projects in Benin, 
Eritrea, Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Bangla desh and India. In addition reports were 
given on the molecular epidemiology of ND using fusion gene cleavage sequencing to 
distinguish different virus strains and the anthropological implications of family poultry 
production. Other presentations focussed on how to write a scientific article or explained how 
to request funds from the IAEA in a successf ul manner. Reviews were presented on the 
different vaccines available for the control of Newcastle disease, on parameters for the 
assessment of the scavengeable feed resour ce for poultry and on the development of a 
sustainable Newcastle disease control programme  including the development of an extension 
package. 
3. ACHIEVEMENTS 
Production characteristics and parameters 
Production parameters and characteristics of family poultry production have been 
compiled and published for eleven African countries (Characteristics and parameters of 
family poultry production in Africa, IAEA 2002). The current publication focuses on results 
of various interventions in family poultry pr oduction. All of the investigators included 
vaccination against Newcastle disease, while additional interventions ranged from providing 
housing using locally available materials and fe eding strategies for different age groups to 
improving health of the birds through additional vaccinations and/or parasite treatments. 
Diagnostic techniques 
At the FAO/IAEA Biotechnology Laboratory in Seibersdorf, Austria, a consultant in 
collaboration with staff from the Animal Production Unit and the Veterinary University 
Vienna developed a standardised and robus t enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
5
 
for detecting antibodies against Newcastle disease in poultry. The ELISA was distributed to a 
number of selected scientists in the form of a ready-to-use kit. The kit was successfully used 
in laboratories in Cameroon, Ke nya, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and Zimbabwe to assess the 
effectiveness of vaccination or to evaluate the epidemiological situation in the village birds. 
The laboratories in Madagascar and Tanzania compared antibody levels in serum samples 
from vaccinated birds in the field using the ELISA technique with results from the 
haemagglutination inhibition test. 
Antibody levels against Gumboro disease were assessed using a commercial test kit in 
Egypt, Madagascar and Sudan. 
Financial evaluations 
All investigators were requested to apply a pa rtial budget analysis to the results of the 
interventions used in the different ecological zones. A format and detailed instructions on its 
application were provided to the scientists. The partial budget calculates the incremental 
income based on the intervention (starting from the baseline income before the intervention). 
The results for each country are presented in the current publication. 
4. RESULTS 
The most critical intervention was strategic vaccination against ND that reduced 
mortality in chicken by up to 80%. All proj ects demonstrated a positive economic return from 
this prophylactic intervention that increased with the use of locally trained people acting as 
“village vaccinators”. Interventions such as f eed supplementation, anti-pa rasitic treatment or 
improved housing were only effective when used  in conjunction with vaccination, and in 
these cases benefits were demonstrated. It  is furthermore recommended that strategic 
vaccination should be introduced, preferably usin g a thermostable vaccine to avoid problems 
with the cold chain. While vaccination against IBR or Fowlpox was shown to have a 
beneficial effect on production;  logistical problems with the administration hamper its 
application. Depending on specific local conditi ons, supplementary feeding and housing of 
chicks, optimising flock composition (e.g. 10 he ns, 3 cocks, 150 chicks, 150 growers) and 
strategic anti-parasitic treatment  of housed poultry can have complementary effects. Surveys 
highlighted the involvement and the unique ro le of women in poultry production. Consumer 
diet preference underlined the potential of farmyard poultry production based on local breeds.  
Economic Importance and Ranking of Interventions 
The interventions investigated were ranked according to their economic importance. 
In the second RCM it was concluded that partial budget analysis and local needs should 
dictate the priority or ranking given to interventions on disease, management or breeds: 
Disease 
Disease control was regarded as the most important intervention and the following 
 parameters were considered:  
6
 
• A vaccination strategy  must be adapted to the local requirements based on 
proper diagnosis and epidemiological factors. As there is a seasonal occurrence of 
ND, it is advisable to vaccinate the chicks within the first 4 weeks after hatching 
with boosters every 4 months thereafter. 
• A thermo-stabile ND-vaccine  is an important prerequisite to reduce the costs 
for the cold chain. The propagation of the I2-vaccine is done in chicken eggs. 
Thermo-stability of the freeze dried formulation is estimated at a minimum of one 
year at 4 degrees Celsius and several weeks at 28 degrees Celsius. The production 
of 100 dose vial quantities should be enc ouraged to accommodate use of family 
poultry owners. 
• Quality assurance, both in production and in appli cation is important to ensure 
the efficiency of the vaccination programme. The production laboratory must avoid 
contamination and seek optimum dilution of the virus suspension in a protective 
buffer. The proper application and vaccin ation coverage should be monitored by 
serology (ELISA). 
• Local government buy-in and community involvement are essential for 
successful and efficient vaccination prog rammes. As poverty alleviation is a 
national goal, administrations shoul d encourage the local production and 
dissemination of this vaccine. The qualit y control should be outsourced not to 
create a conflict of interest. 
• Cost recovery must be included in the vaccination programme. The production 
cost of the vaccine is rather low with  the main costs stemming from bottling and 
distribution. Investments for quality assuran ce and the monitoring of protection in 
the field should also be included in the total vaccine price. 
• A holistic vaccination approach for ND in combination with IBR or/and Fowl-
Pox increases the efficiency and acceptance of poultry vaccination programmes in 
the rural communities. 
• Diagnostics are important components of di sease control and upgrading 
infrastructure and diagnostic capability of th e responsible instituti ons are essential. 
Only the constant monitoring of the disease situation and the virus strains 
circulating will allow timely and effective interventions. 
Management 
Improvement of poultry management has a significant influence on the reduction of 
 chick mortality. 
• Creep feeding and assessment of local versus commercial feed resources for the 
first 4–6 weeks reduced mortality remark ably. Feed supplementation of chicks 
improves the growth of chicks and in parallel resistance to infection and parasites. 
At the same time it reduces the movement and thus the risk due to predators. 
• Improved housing had a positive impact due to reduced predator access, 
specifically at night.  
• Management training of the smallholder was considered essential. As backyard 
poultry farming is seen as a “hobby”, investment in this activity is uncommon. The 
7
 
public must be made aware that small investments in vaccinations and improved 
management can yield significant returns in increased income. 
• The influence of breeds and genetics  was considered important but not 
investigated in this CRP.  
Conclusions of the CRP 
The conclusions from the research results presented at the final RCM were: 
• Strategic ND vaccination reduced mortality up to 80% 
• Partial budget analysis showed a subs tantial return on investment for ND 
vaccination of village chicken in all countries 
• Only in ND vaccinated birds did feed supplementation and anti-parasitic 
treatment show an additional positive return  
• Other interventions such as housing had a complementary effect 
• Farmyard poultry production was generally managed by women  
Recommendations and future implications of the CRP 
The meeting led to the following recommendations: 
• Strategic vaccination and a treatment pr ogramme should be introduced for each 
country with strong local support through village vaccinators 
• Local vaccine production (preferably ther mostable) with suitable quality control 
measures should be supported and vi als of 100 dose quantities would be 
advantageous  
• Local conditions and by-products should be evaluated to assess supplementary 
feeding requirements of chicks  
• The ideal flock composition is 10 hens, 3 cocks, 150 chicks, 150 growers  
• After hatching, chicks should be remove d to allow creep feeding in order to 
increase the clutching cycle 
• Country specific extension documents/g uidelines on the production of poultry 
should be produced and promulgated 
• The interaction and collaboration between veterinary and extension services, 
farmers and other stakeholders (NGOs) should be promoted 
• Local Farmer Associations should be or ganized to allow for a better access to 
vaccines and drugs and to improve marketing 
• The possibility of developing chicken breeds resistant to the major poultry 
diseases (in particular Gumboro) should be investigated  
 
8
 
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The farmyard production of poultry is seen as  a profitable enterprise according to the 
findings of this CRP. It not only has the potential to reduce poverty of the rural poor, 
but also add to their sustainable food resour ces. Necessary inputs to benefit fully from 
small-scale production are vacci nes and their delivery, feeding and management skills. 
Women, as the main producers of chicken, bear the burden of these small-scale 
enterprises. The respective veterinary authorities are asked to secure the availability of 
vaccines and to promote the management practices shown to be profitable in the rural 
communities and farmers associations. Th e production of a manual translating the 
results of this CRP into laymen terms would certainly support this informal sector.  
 
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPERT PRESENTATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
USE OF A STANDARDIZED FORM FOR PARTIAL BUDGET ANALYSES 
TO ASSESS THE FEASIBILITY AND EFFICIENCY OF INTERVENTIONS 
IN FAMILY POULTRY OPERATIONS IN 11 AFRICAN COUNTRIES 
R. KLOS, C. EISELE, T. BENNETT, G. FRANK, B. GOODGER  
University of Wisconsin, Madison; School of Veterinary Medicine; Dept. of Medical 
Sciences, Madison, Wisconsin, Unites States of America 
Abstract 
The economic evaluation of interventions in management and health of chicken in a backyard 
production system depends on strict rules for the data acquisition. Here we describe a form for 
sampling data for partial budget analysis. Eleven countries supplied sufficient data to calculate the 
economic benefit of certain interventions. For core interventions like Newcastle vaccination, feed 
supplementation and improved housing of chicks, the return of investment had a factor of 3 to 6, but 
reaching 18 when vaccine was administered by the farmer. The research contract holders successfully 
used the data acquisition form and all economic data in this publication are based on it. 
INTRODUCTION 
Family poultry production in many rural areas of Africa is an important source of food 
and income as well as a major source of protei n; unfortunately there have traditionally been 
many constraints on production. Village poultry production is a low input system with little 
investment on disease control and prevention, supplemental feed or housing and results in low 
output from high losses and low production. 
An FAO/IAEA funded five year coordinated research project (CRP) was initiated in 
1998 to study family poultry in 12 African count ries and to then suggest and initiate 
appropriate intervention strategies that are econo mically viable. The firs t phase of the project 
involved surveying village farmers to assess ne eds and shortcomings and to formulate plans 
for the intervention phase [1]. Village surveys indicated that three of the top four most 
commonly reported clinical signs of disease (greenish/bloody diarrhoea, swollen head, and 
coughing) are also signs of Newcastle diseas e [2]. Other contributions in this current 
publication outline all the specific intervention strategies that were initiated; however, 
vaccination against Newcastle disease virus was a component of intervention in each of the 12 
participating countries. Other interventions included supplemental feeding, improved housing, 
control of parasites, vaccina tion against infectious bursal di sease virus (Gumboro Disease) 
and against Fowl Pox. 
An important aspect of the second phase was to conduct a partial budget analysis on 
the interventions to determine their viability in the future. Profitability of new management 
strategies is pivotal to there recommendation for future use. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The chief scientific investigators were provided a set of guidelines for calculating 
economic parameters including profit and return on investment and a sample partial budgeting 
form (Table I) was provided [3]. 11 countries have provided economic data for each of their 
intervention strategies. The steps outlined for farm budgeting are: 
13
 
• Establish baseline data so additional income received from the intervention 
strategies can be calculated 
• Calculate additional (increased) income from the intervention strategies by 
calculating the difference between income while on the programme from estimated 
income before the programme 
• Additional (increased) Income = Income while in programme – Income before 
the programme 
• Estimate the programme costs by itemizing and adding the costs of each input 
• Determine the profit by calculating the difference between the additional income 
generated and the programme costs 
• Profit = Additional Income – Programme Costs 
• Determine the return on investment of the intervention programme by dividing 
the additional income by the cost of the programme 
• Return = Additional Income / Programme Costs 
• The criteria for a successful intervention is a dollar income >$1(profit) or a 
return >$1 
TABLE I. SAMPLE PARTIAL BUDGETING FORM. 
Partial Budgeting Form 
(cash flow) 
 
Name of Country:    Date: 
 
INCREASED CASH VALUE INCREASED CASH REQUIRED 
Additional Cash Incomes Additional Cash Costs 
Example:  
adult and growers sold 
 
 
 
 
 Example: 
–Newcastle vaccine cost 
–Labour to give 
vaccination 
–Material Costs for 
wicker baskets 
–Labour to make wicker 
baskets 
 
Increased cash income  $________ Increased cash costs    $________ 
Total cash income     $________ Total cash costs       $________ 
  Cash income minus cash costs (profit)           $________  
Cash income divided by cash costs (return)         $________ 
RESULTS 
Partial budget analyses of intervention st rategies were provided by 11 counties 
(Cameroon, Côte D’Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, Keny a, Madagascar, Mauritius, Morocco, Sudan, 
Tanzania and Uganda). In order to compare outcomes and profitability between various 
countries with different monetary systems th e economic analysis was converted to United 
States dollars (US $) so interpretation of re sults could be made on an equivalent scale. 
Cameroon, Côte D’Ivoire and Ghana did not pr ovide their partial budgets in US $ so 
14
 
conversion rates from 2002 and 2003 were obtained. The exchange rate for Cameroon was set 
at 611.24 CFA francs per US $ by calculating th e average exchanges rate from January 2003 
through March 2003, which was the period when on-farm monitoring and collection of data 
was being conducted. The period of interventions for Côte D’Ivoire was June 2003 through 
December 2003 and the average exchange rate  for that period was 563.94 CFA francs per 
US $. Finally, Ghana’s exchange rate was established by obtaining the average rate from 2002 
through 2003 which was 8305.03 cedis per US $. 
In order to summarize the partial budget information, intervention strategies were 
divided into three categories based on the core management interventions that were focused 
on during planning meetings, these are: 1) vaccination against Newcastle disease virus 
2) supplemental feeding and 3) improved housin g. While these are broad categories and the 
exact management strategy is not the same in each country, they represent basic areas of focus 
within the current poultry farming system that  received attention by researchers. Other 
intervention strategies were implemented along side the core three, but in order to simplify 
the overall information, they will not be cons idered in the economic analysis. Table II 
summarizes the core interventions made by each country and provides their profits and 
returns in US $. Egypt was not included in this table because their intervention and partial 
budget analysis focused on vaccination agains t infectious bursal disease virus (Gumboro 
Disease), not Newcastle disease vaccination. 
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF THE CORE INTERVENTIONS. 
Country Profit           
(U.S.$)
Return          
(U.S.$)
Newcastle Disease 
Vacccination
Supplemental 
Feeding Improved Housing
Cameroon Ndop Zone $0.18 $1.22 x
Cameroon Santa Zone $10.00 $12.07 x
Cote D'Ivoire Group1 $33.46 $3.93 x
Cote D'Ivoire Group2 $637.48 $4.00 xx
Cote D'Ivoire Group3 $62.66 $5.61 xxx
Ghana Treatment $403.83 $8.71 x
Ghana farmer given ND vac $570.67 $155.88 x
Kenya control $108.54 $1.85
Kenya 1 Interv. $59.87 $1.15 x
Kenya 1 Interv. $369.56 $3.36 x
Kenya 2 Interv. $178.92 $1.34 xx
Madagascar Treatment 1 $18.33 $10.17 x
Madagascar Treatment 2 $33.06 $4.20 xxx
Mauritius phase 1, zone 1 $51.90 $13.36 x
Mauritius phase 1, zone 2 $70.60 $17.81 x
Mauritius phase 2, zone2 $47.00 $1.60 xx
Morocco Intervention 1 $140.00 $2.40 x
Morocco Intervention 2 $471.00 $3.50 xx
Sudan year 1 $642.00 $6.31 x
Sudan year 2 $1,610.00 $3.28 xx
Sudan year3 $2,190.00 $18.52 xx
Tanzania Intervention $2,326.00 $3.49 x
Uganda montane region $1,534.00 $2.81 x
Uganda agropastoral region $1,093.00 $1.67 x  
 
 
15
 
DISCUSSION 
Examination of the partial budgets revealed that single and multiple intervention 
strategies initiated in each country were all profitable and had a positive return on investment. 
Initial assessment of the programmes raises two key points. First of all, the research 
conducted in the initial portion of the study pr ovided helpful information for determining 
which intervention strategies were needed and could be successfully implemented within the 
current system. Secondly, in this low input poul try system, focusing investment in the key 
area of disease control can produce significant economic benefits. 
Information summarized in Table II clearly indicates that implementation of the 
Newcastle disease vaccination yields a positive return. No country found that vaccinating 
poultry against this virus was unprofitable. Th e next decision is whether the addition of a 
second or third core intervention is economically prudent. Feed tends to be a fairly high input 
intervention strategy and housing is a strategy with an initial investme nt that requires less 
input later. Tables III and IV have grouped in tervention strategies by single intervention and 
multiple interventions and present their effect on profit and return. Profits from using a single 
intervention range from $ 0.18 to $ 2323.00 while the returns on investment have a narrower 
range from $ 1.15 to $ 17.81 with the mean being $ 6.32. The mean return on investment 
when multiple interventions were implemented  was $ 5.26 and while this is also a positive 
return it is slightly less than a single intervention strategy and it required more investment and 
management. Six countries implemented multiple interventions as well as a single 
intervention including Newcastle vaccination onl y. Of these six countries, four found that 
vaccinating against Newcastle disease alone, yielded a higher return than adding other 
interventions with the vaccination. These resu lts indicate the variability in outcome when 
housing and/or supplemental feeding is added.  The variability in housing occurs because it 
depends on what structure is built (capital costs) and how costs are financed (cash or loan) 
and variability in supplemental feeding occurs because feed costs depend on which 
birds/chicks are supplemented and what the de mand and supply of feed are in the market 
place.  
TABLE III.  PROFITS AND RETURNS FROM IMPLEMENTATION OF A SINGLE 
INTERVENTION. 
Profit           
(U.S.$)
Return          
(U.S.$)
Newcastle 
Disease 
Vacccination
Supplemental 
Feeding
Improved 
Housing
Cameroon Ndop Zone $0.18 $1.22 x
Cameroon Santa Zone $10.00 $12.07 x
Cote D'Ivoire Group1 $33.46 $3.93 x
Ghana Treatment $403.83 $8.71 x
Kenya 1 interv $59.87 $1.15 x
Kenya 1 interv $369.56 $3.36 x
Madagascar Treatment 1 $18.33 $10.17 x
Mauritius phase 1, zone 1 $51.90 $13.36 x
Mauritius phase 1, zone 2 $70.60 $17.81 x
Morocco Intervention 1 $140.00 $2.40 x
Sudan year 1 $642.00 $6.31 x
Tanzania intervention $2,326.00 $3.49 x
Uganda montane region $1,534.00 $2.81 x
Uganda agropastoral region $1,093.00 $1.67 x
Range- min $0.18 $1.15
Range- max $2,326.00 $17.81
Average $6.32
Profits and Returns from Implementation of a Single Intervention
 
16
 
TABLE IV. RETURNS FROM VARIOUS VACCINATION PROTOCOLS USED IN GHANA. 
Vaccine type Heat stable  NDI-2 Heat stable  NDI-2 Heat stable  NDI-2
Route 
administered eye drop feather brushing eye feather brushing eye, 
farmer administered
Returns 14.79 11.08 155.88
Vaccine Comparisons
 
 
TABLE V.  PROFITS AND RETURNS FROM IMPLEMENTATION OF MULTIPLE 
INTERVENTIONS 
 
Work conducted in Ghana also showed the sign ificant increase in return that can be 
achieved by teaching farmers to administer their own Newcastle disease vaccinations. Tables 
IV and V. show returns from various vaccinatio n protocols used in Ghana. A difference in 
return of $144.8 more is achieved by having fa rmers administer their own vaccinations. This 
level of return far exceeds anything seen with other interventions.  
CONCLUSION 
Data provided in this CRP report clearly indicates that vaccination against Newcastle 
disease is an economically viable recommend ation for low input poultry production. The use 
of supplemental feed and improved housing as additional management changes can also be 
profitable, but these strategies do require more  input and do not deliver the same consistent 
returns that vaccination produces. Because of the variability in local market conditions for 
feed and the availability of financing for housing, feed supplementation and housing should 
be considered for targeted intervention on a case-by-case basis. Newcastle disease vaccination 
is consistently profitable and effective, therefore vaccination is recommended for low input 
family poultry production in the countries participating in this project. 
 
 
 
Profit 
(U.S.$) 
Return 
(U.S.$)
Newcastle 
Disease 
Vacccination
Supplemental 
Feeding 
Improved 
Housing
Cote D'Ivoire Group2 $637.48 $4.0
0
x x 
Cote D'Ivoire Group3 $62.66 $5.6
1
x x x
Kenya 2 interv $178.92 $1.3
4
x x 
Madagascar Treatment 2 $33.06 $4.2
0
x x x
Mauritius phase 2, zone2 $47.00 $1.6
0
x x
Morocco Intervention $471.00 $3.5
0
x x 
Sudan year 2 $1,610.0 $3.2
8
x x
Sudan year3 $2,190.0 $18.52 x x
Range- min $33.06 $1.3
4Range- max $2,190.00 $18.5
2Average
 $5.2
6
Profits and Returns from Implementation of Muliple Interventions 
17
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  DWINGER, R.H., ed., Characteristics a nd parameters of famil y poultry production in 
Africa. Results of a FAO/IAEA Coordina ted Research Programme, IAEA, Vienna, 
Austria (2002). 
[2]  GOODGER, W.J., BENNETT, T.B., DWINGER, R.H., Comparative analysis of 
family poultry production in twelve Afri can countries. In: Characteristics and 
parameters of family poultr y production in Africa, Results of a FAO/IAEA 
Coordinated Research Programme. IAEA, Vienna, Austria, (2002) 144. 
[3]  GOODGER, W.J., FRANK, G., EISELE, C., BENNETT, T., Using partial budgets to 
assess if the interventions you designed/implemented make more $ than they cost. 
Proceedings of 3rd RCM, Quatre Bornes, Mauritius (2002) 8pp. 
18
 
TECHNICAL PARAMETERS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF 
SCAVENGEABLE FEED RESOURCE FOR POULTRY 
E.B. SONAIYA 
Obafemi Awolowo University, Faculty of Agriculture, Dept. of Animal Science,  
Ife, Nigeria 
Abstract  
The scavengeable feed resource (SFR) comprises materials from two sources: household food 
waste and leftovers (HHL), and materials from the environment, i.e. crop by-products and the 
gleanings of gardens, fields and wastelands. This manual reviews and develops parameters and 
procedures for the estimation of SFR for birds that are on dedicated ranges without households or on 
homesteads. The aim is to determine the total amount of scavengeable material in any particular range 
(with or without households) in order to determine the “carrying capacity” of the range for poultry in 
different seasons and to estimate how much supplements will be required to meet the production target 
set for the flock size. The first parameter, the usage of the range, is assessed by visual inspection, 
space measurement and by automatic monitoring of birds by the use of telemetry. The second 
parameter is the intake of scavengeable materials (plants, insects and metazoans) from the range. The 
Pitfall trap method, Transect mapping and Quadrants are used to estimate the available feed materials 
while the actual intake of these materials is estimated by visual identification, physical separation and 
chemical analysis of the content of the crops of scavenging birds. 
DEFINITION AND SCOPE OF SFR  
All poultry systems that allow birds acce ss to pasture, yard or range promote 
scavenging in some way. There is clearly a need to have more data on the available feed that 
can be scavenged from the free range, pasture and backyard as well as on how or what to 
supplement highly productive birds on the free ra nge. The development of parameters for the 
assessment of the scavengeable feed resource can be of benefit to all poultry systems that 
involve some degree of scavenging. This manua l presents the parameters and the procedures 
for the assessment of the amount of edible (feed)  material for poultry that is available in a 
given rangeland, pasture or common land in a villag e. It is envisaged th at this manual will be 
useful for researchers, technicians, developm ent workers, trainers, technical institutions, 
students and farmers. 
The concept of a scavengeable feed resource base (SFRB) was developed from field 
work done in Sri Lanka (Roberts and Gunaratne, 1992; Gunaratne et al , 1993). The SFRB 
comprises household waste, crop by-products a nd the gleanings of gardens, fields and 
wastelands if the homestead is the focus of  scavenging. Without the confinement of the 
homestead, the SFRB can be defined as all the materials that are always or seasonally 
available in the environment and which the scavenging birds can use as feed (Sonaiya et. al., 
2002a). 
Having in view non-family poultry systems that utilize the range, the discussion of the 
parameters for scavengeable feed resource will include assessment of the range where there 
may be no households. For this reason, and to distinguish the scope from that within which 
SFRB was developed, the term Scavengeable Feed Resource (SFR) will be used in this 
manual. 
19
 
SFR: origin and sources 
The Scavengeable Feed Resource is made up of edible materials from the household 
and their surrounding environment such as f ood leftovers, by-products from harvesting and 
processing of grains, and cultivated and wild vegetation.  
Household Food Wastes and Leftovers (HHL) 
The scavengeable feed resource (SFR) in cludes the total amount of household food 
waste and leftover (HHL) that is thrown out and available to all scavenging animals in a given 
area. The size of the HHL depends on the number of households, the food crops grown and 
their processing methods as well as on the clim atic conditions that de termine the rate of 
decomposition of these food wastes. The HHL can  be harvested by all scavenging animals 
(cattle, buffalo, sheep, donkey, goats, pigs, dogs, cats as well as wild, undomesticated 
animals) which all compete with poultry. The extent of the HHL that can be harvested 
depends on the species of poultry. A mixture of  species of poultry is more effective in 
harvesting this resource than a single species can be. 
Factors affecting quantity of HHL 
Among the factors that determine the quan tity of HHL are: climate, village housing 
density, crops grown, livestock owned, and relig ion or culture. Roberts (1999) reported that 
the size of the SFR varied with seasonal conditions and with activities such as cultivation and 
harvest. Kitalyi (1998) observe d that available SFR depends  on the agricultural production 
system prevailing in the village (which in cludes the cropping patte rn, the animal production 
system) and the eating habits of the society. 
Edible Materials from the Environment 
The major scavengeable feed resources from the environment come from:  
• household surroundings (gardens, crops and orchards, harvest residues) and  
• uncultivated land, with such components as  grass shoots, grass seeds, worms, 
insects, molluscs – snails, slugs, and st one grits and sand (Roberts and Senaratne, 
1992; Sonaiya, 1995; Sonaiya et al, 2002a). 
The portion of SFR that comes from the e nvironment apart from the household varies 
with season and rainfall as well as with the life cycle of insects and other invertebrates. 
Tadelle (1996) reported that in Ethiopia, the SF R is deficient in protein during the dry season 
and in energy during the rainy season.  
Generally, the supply of feed from scavengeable sources will be low from mid-dry 
season to mid-rain season, when there will be low insects and metazo an numbers, less green 
plant cover, low or no harvesting activities and so on. The reverse will be the case for 
between mid-rain to mid-dry seasons. 
In summary, scavengeable feed resource (SFR) can be defined as all the materials that 
are always, or seasonally available in the environment and which scavenging chickens use as 
feed (Sonaiya et al, 2002a). The methods for determination of SFR developed by Roberts and 
Gunaratne (1992) were based ma inly on the quantity of household leftovers only, thereby 
20
 
neglecting other contributions to the determ ination of SFR. But where there are no 
households, the environmental contribution will entirely determine SFR.  
PARAMETERS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF SFR FOR POULTRY  
Poultry scavenge around the household in farmsteads or village as well as on pastures, 
scrublands and forests around the village or fa rmstead. Their range, therefore, includes both 
households and open range. 
Parameters for Direct estimation of SFR available  
The aim is to determine the total amount of s cavengeable feed in any particular range, 
determine the “carrying capacity” of the range for poultry and then be able to determine what 
and how much supplements are required to meet the production target set for the flock size. 
Parameter 1 – HHL 
The first attempts to directly assess SFR in Southeast Asia were based on the 
assumption that the household leftover (HHL) is the parameter, which makes the greater 
contribution to SFR than the materials from the environment. For example, Gunaratne et al 
(1993) reported a 72% contribution of HHL to SFR. Furthermore, various formulas for 
measuring, calculating or predicting SFR are HHL-based. Roberts (1992) in Sri Lanka, and 
Sonaiya et al (2002b) in Nigeria estimated an HHL-bas ed SFR per flock and per bird unit, 
respectively. In the stepwise regression of SFR on some predictors, HHL contributed more to 
the accuracy of the prediction than any other parameter (Sonaiya et al, 2002b).  
Parameter 2 – Range Usage 
In the open range where there is no househol d and hence, no HHL, it is the materials 
from the environment that will entirely determin e the contribution to the SFR. Under such a 
condition, an important parameter to measure is the usage of the given area of land by birds. 
Are there ‘activity centres’ where birds will gather? This can simply be assessed by visual 
inspection, space measurement and by automatic monitoring of birds. One way to monitor 
birds automatically is by the use of telemetry in which transmitters, receivers and data loggers 
are used to monitor the ranging activity of birds. 
Parameter 3 – Range Biota Content 
It is also important to assess the amount of  scavengeable feed available from the open 
range apart from HHL. Quadrants can be used to determine the distribution of plants (grasses) 
per unit land area at a given time. Pitfall traps can be used to determine the number of insects 
and other metazoans available per unit area of  land. Since changing climatic conditions (dry 
vs. rainy season) affect biota, it is necessary to determine their content in both seasons. 
21
 
METHODS THAT HAVE BEEN USED FOR ASSESSING SFR 
Roberts (1992) proposed two methods of dete rmining the value of the SFR. One is 
based on household leftovers (HHL). The HH L method requires weighing the amount of 
household food leftovers generated by each famil y per day (H), the proportion of the crop 
content of scavenging birds (P) which is made up of H as determined by visual inspection. 
The ratio of H:P is then multiplied by the ratio of number of families in the community (n) to 
the number of families in the community with chickens (n–x). 
Direct assessment of SFR on Farmsteads by the HHL method 
Sonaiya et al  (2002b) used the HHL method to es timate the SFR in four villages 
within the south-western rain forest ecozone of Nigeria, namely Ipetumodu 1 (P1), Ipetumodu 
2 (P2), Moro (MR) and Yakooyo (YK). 
The formula used for the assessment was that of Roberts (1992). 
       SFR = 
xn
n
P
H
−*  
Where: H  is the household leftover (kg dry weight) 
 P  is the proportion of crop content, which is household leftover 
 n  is the number of households in the settlement 
 x  is the number of households in the settlement that are not keeping chickens 
The factors H and P were obtained by meas urements. The values for n and n–x were 
obtained from a census and (n/n–x) was treated as a ratio. 
Determination of H, quantity of household leftover 
Random samples of 3 cooperators in each of four villages (P1, P2, YK, MR) were 
selected for the collection of household leftovers.  Plastic wastebaskets were supplied to these 
cooperators who were instructed to drop ho usehold kitchen leftovers in the baskets. 
Collection of household leftove rs was done daily from week 1–4. Another group of twelve 
households were used for collection of household leftovers from week 5–8. Thus, a total of 24 
households were used for collection of HHL in all the villages. 
When the household leftovers were collected, they were put in plastic bags, labelled 
and taken in a cool box to the laboratory where they were dried in a Gallenkamp hot air oven 
to a constant weight in 72 hours. 
The average household leftover (H, kg/family/day), was determined as follows:   
H =  Total weight of househol d leftovers from a settlement 
 Number of families from which they are collected 
 
After drying to a constant weight, the household leftovers were ground, homogenized 
and samples were taken and stored in sample bottles, from which sub-samples were later 
taken for chemical analyses. 
22
 
Determination of P, proportion of crop content in household leftovers 
Forty-two tracer birds, 14 from P1, 8 each from YK and P2, and 12 from MR were 
used for the crop content examination. Determin ation of crop content wa s done at the end of 
week 4 of the study. The tracer birds we re purchased from the flock owners, whether 
cooperators or not, who were w illing to sell their birds. A total of 14 cocks, 20 growers and 8 
hens were used as tracer birds. 
The collection of tracer birds was done between 7.00 am and 7.00 pm in all the 
settlements. The tracer birds were killed immediately they were caught, eviscerated and the 
crop of each bird was removed, labelled and kept  in the freezer overnight. The next morning 
the crops were opened up, the materials contai ned in them were visually identified and 
physically separated into two: material co ming from the households and those coming from 
the environment. Fig. 1 shows some of the biological materials that are identified from the 
crops of the scavenging chickens. 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 1: Some feed materials in the crops of scaven ging chickens in southwestern Nigeria (Photo O.A. 
Olukosi). 
 
The crop contents, thus partitioned for each bird, were put in separate petri dishes and 
dried in hot air oven, for 72 hours until they atta ined a constant weight. The materials were 
then weighed, the crop content of all the tr acer birds in each settlement were mixed and 
ground for subsequent chemical analyses. 
P was determined for each tracer bird as follows: 
P =   Dry weight of crop content identified as household leftovers, g 
 Total dry weight of crop content, g 
 
The average P for all the tracer birds in a settlement was determined for each of the 
settlements. 
Yam peelings Pawpaw inflorescence 
Grated cassava sievings 
23
 
Chemical Analyses 
Proximate analysis of the samples of the ingesta (crop contents) and samples of 
household leftovers was carried out. Birds were a cclimatized to the range types for at least 2 
days before they were sacrificed for crop content analysis. This is based on the fact that most 
of the marker from a marked meal can be recovered within 24 hours. Birds were caught from 
the range and sacrificed every 4 hours for a total of 12 hours per day for 14 days. According 
to Feltwell and Fox (1978) birds fill their crop in four hours cycles of eating, although some 
of the feed may completely bypass the crop on its way to the stomach, depending on the 
nutritional status of the bird and type of feed. Hence, it may be necessary to analyse the entire 
gastro intestinal tract and not just the crop within the 12-hour period between 06.30 and 
18.30. 
The digestive tracts of the sacrificed birds were opened, materials in the holding 
organs (proventriculus, crop and gizzard) were separated into individual petri-dishes and 
physically identified visually for seeds, insects, worms and plant materials. Visual and 
physical separation of the contents of holding  organs enabled identification of the diet 
components. These were separated, weighed a nd the proportion of each class calculated. The 
separated components were  dried to constant weight and ch emically analysed for proximate 
fractions by the method of AOAC (1994). Gros s energy was determined using Gallenkamp 
ballistic bomb calorimeter (Model CB – 370) and from gross energy values the metabolizable 
energy content was calculated (by using th e method of Larbier and Leclerq, 1992). All 
analyses were done in duplicates.  
Statistical design and analysis 
The statistical design of the study was the randomised complete block design. Each of the 
settlements was a block while the cooperators' flocks were the replicates. The data on flock 
characteristics of the study settlements was subjected to descriptive analysis using the mean, 
percentages and ranges. 
Data collected on performance and reproductiv e parameters were subjected to a two-
way analysis of variance using the general linear model procedure of SAS. Significantly 
different means were separated using the Duncan's multiple range test. 
Results of Direct Assessment of SFR on Farmsteads  
TABLE I. QUANTITIES OF HOUSEHOLD LEFTOVERS IN VILLAGES. 
Household leftovers, g/day  
Villages Dry weight Wet weight 
Moro 50 54 
Yakooyo 175 187 
Ipetumodu 1 117 125 
Ipetumodu 2 108 116 
Average 112 121 
Source: Olukosi (2002) 
24
 
TABLE II. NUTRITIVE VALUE OF MATERIALS IN THE CROP AND IN THE HOUSEHOLD 
LEFTOVERS. 
Proximate fractions Crop c ontent Household leftovers 
Dry matter, % 97.7 92.9 
Organic matter, % 77.2 92.1 
Ash, % 22.8 8.2 
Crude fibre, % 7.8 13.6 
Ether Extract, % 9.5 15.9 
Crude protein, % 8.7 8.8 
NFE, % 49.1 59.1 
Metabolizable Energy 
(determined), kcal/kg 
2767 3646 
Source: Olukosi (2002) 
TABLE III. THE AVERAGE DAILY SFR. 
SFR, g/flock/day SFR, kg/year Village  
Wet weight Dry weight Dry weight 
Moro 132 121 43 
Yakooyo 430 427 153 
Ipetumodu 1 368 360 131 
Ipetumodu 2 359 352 127 
Average  363 315 114 
Source: Olukosi (2002) 
TABLE IV. AMOUNT OF SFR IN FOUR VILLAGES IN SW-NIGERIA. 
Villages Scavengeable feed 
resource, g/bird/d 
Metabolizable energy, 
kcal/bird/day 
Crude protein,  
g/bird/day 
Moro 6.9 20.75 0.48 
Yakooyo 23.7 54.91 2.04 
Ipetumodu I 22.5 63.86 2.41 
Ipetumodu II 26.9 76.34 2.31 
Average 19.7 53.97 1.81 
Source: Sonaiya et al., 2002b 
Discussion of Direct Assessment of SFR on Farmsteads 
The average daily HHL in southwest Nigeria was 121 g/day (Table I), it was made up 
of cooked rice, weevil-infested cowpea, peppe r, onion, yam peelings and sundries (bread, 
vegetable twigs, yam flour dough ( amala)). The HHL made up 64% of the crop content. The 
other materials in the crop were insects a nd metazoan, grass blades, and grits (in the 
descending order of abundance). The HHL ha d 92.1% organic matter,  15.7% oil and 8.8% 
crude protein (Table II). The higher value of ash in the crop content is as a result of grits 
which the chicken swallow and act as diluents for the HHL in the crop. 
The average quantity of SFR was 363g/floc k/day and 115.1kg/flock/year (Table III). 
This translates into an SFR of 19.7g/bird/day providing 53.97 kcal ME/bird/day and 1.81g 
crude protein/bird/day (Table IV). The stud y was carried out in the dry season (November–
January), this is not harvest season in Nigeria. 
25
 
In a study amongst thirty-four families in Sri Lankan villages (Gunaratne et al., 1993), 
24-hour collection of (HHL) was made on 14 occasions. The collections were weighed, 
identified visually and analyzed for proxima te composition, calcium and phosphorus. Fifteen 
hens were collected late in the morning while scavenging, slaughtered and their crop and 
gizzard content collected, identified visually, weighed and chemically analysed (Table V). 
TABLE V. MAJOR FEED COMPONENTS IN THE CROP CONTENT OF SCAVENGING HENS.  
Component DM CP EE CF Ash Ca P 
 Percent mg/g 
Household waste 43.2 10.3 7.2 2.2 1.4 0.8 4.0 
Coconut residue 24.1 6.9 38.1 8.9 1.1 1.1 6.0 
Broken rice 89.9 9.0 1.3 1.5 3.2 0.5 1.4 
Crop content 34.4 9.4 9.2 5.4 16.0 0.8 0.9 
Source: Gunaratne et al., 1993 
The average daily HHL was 460 ±210 g drained, wet weight. The HHL was made up 
of 26% cooked rice, 30% coconut residue, 8%  broken rice and 36% sundries (vegetable 
trimmings, egg shells, bread, dried fish and scraps). HHL comprised 72% of the crop content 
of the 15 hens that were slaughtered. The balance of the crop content came from the 
environment and consisted of 13% grass shoots, 8% small me tazoans (earthworms, snails, 
ants and flies) and 7% paddy rice. 
The SFR determined by the HHL method in  south-east Asia (Table VI) contained 
300–600 g dry matter, 8–10% of vegeta ble protein and 2,100–2,500 kcal ME/kg 
(Prawirokusumo, 1988; Gunaratne et al , 1993). The amount of prot ein and metabolizable 
energy (ME) in the SFR was determined from an analysis of the crop content. In Sri Lanka, 
the annual SFR available to each family was cal culated to contain 23kg of protein and 468 
Mcal ME (Gunaratne et al., 1993). 
TABLE VI. SFR VALUES OF AVERAGE FAMILY FLOCK IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA. 
Country SFR, kg DM/year Source 
Indonesia  475 Kingston and Creswell, 1982 
Thailand  390 Janviriyasopak et al., 1989 
Sri Lanka  195 Gunaratne et al., 1993 
Sri Lanka 197 Gunaratne et al., 1993 
Direct assessment of SFR on Free Range 
On free range, the feed resources come from the environment; the first procedure in 
the assessment of SFR is to asse ss the use of the range by the birds. Poultry cover accessible 
area of the range in search of feed. To de termine SFR on the range requires using two groups 
of methods. The first group is to estimate proba ble feed materials available on the range and 
includes the pitfall trap and the Transect mapping and Quadrant. The second group is to 
evaluate the actual content of the crop of the birds after scavenging and includes visual and 
physical separation of the crop content as well as chemical analysis. 
Pitfall trap method 
This is used for the measurement of the quantity of insects and other metazoans which 
are trapped, identified and classified. The am ount and type of the crawling insects and 
26
 
metazoans can be determined by the pitfall tr ap method of Obeng-Ofori (1994) as modified 
by Olukosi (2002). An area 1m 2 is used for each estimation. Five bottle jars, each 6 cm in 
diameter both at the top and bottom, 13 cm in  height and 0.2 cm rim thickness are buried to 
the level of 1 cm below the soil, with the soil gently sloping into the bottle (Fig. 2). The five 
bottles in the 1m2 area are arranged diagonally with approximately 30 cm space between them 
(Fig. 3). Fig. 4 shows the bottle jars used as traps in Olukosi (2002) study.  
 
FIG. 2: The placement of the bottle on the ground. 
 
FIG. 3. Layout of bottle jar traps on 1-m 2 of ground 
27
 
 
FIG. 4. The pitfall trap jars used in the study (Photo: O.A. Olukosi) 
 
The bottle traps are filled to 1/4 capacity w ith 4% formaldehyde solution, and left in 
place for 24 hours. After the 24 hours, the trap s are removed, and the insects and other 
metazoans caught are identifie d and counted. Ten random trap  samplings should be taken 
from each of the pits. The species trapped are id entified and classified by their orders using 
the NRI (1996) chart, and then counted. The tota l collection of the species in the different 
orders are oven-dried and weighed to determine the quantity of insects and metazoans trapped 
per m2 of range in 24 hours. 
Transect mapping and Quadrants of the vegetation cover 
This can be done using the method of Ki rsopp-Reed (1994) as modified by Olukosi 
(2002). A transect map can be drawn following walks across the range during which 
vegetation cover and the slope of the land are recorded. Quadrants of 1m2 are used to facilitate 
the determination of number of plant stands per square meter (Fig. 5). Ten random throwings 
of quadrants should be made at different vege tation zones in the range to allow estimation of 
plant components. The number of anthills (if pres ent) in each range should be counted in the 
process of transect mapping. The total number of  anthills is counted for each range or for a 
measured area of the range. Quantification sh ould be per square meter of land area and 
replicated at least thrice for each range area and for a total of 12 days in each season of the 
year. 
In Olukosi (2002) study, transect mapping  was based on walks across the villages 
during which vegetation cover a nd the slope of the land were recorded. Quadrants of 1m 2 
were used to facilitate the determination of number of plant stands per square meter (Fig. 5). 
Ten random throwings of quadrants were done at different vegetation zones within each 
village to allow estimation of plant component s. The total number of refuse heaps were 
counted for each of the settlements. In the case of P1 and P2, the determination of the refuse 
heaps was done by counting the number of refuse heaps in a measured area of the settlement, 
and then the total number of refuse heaps for the entire settlement was estimated.  
28
 
 
FIG. 5. The Quadrant Used in the study and its placement on the ground (Photo: O.A. Olukosi) 
Statistical Analysis and Design 
All data from different range types should be analysed by ANOVA to test the effects 
of season, range type, species and breed and the significantly different means compared using 
Duncan’s multiple range test. 
For simplicity, we will consider a three-factor design. The factors are:  
• Range types ( three range types: shrub, grass and the mix) 
• Breed types (two types: local and exotic) 
• Species (three species: chicken, ducks and guinea fowl) 
This is a 2 × 3 × 3 factorial design. There are three main effects namely the effects of 
the breed type, the range type and the species. There are also three 2-factor interactions, i.e. 
the breed × range type, breed × species and species × range type interactions, and finally one 
3-factor interaction, the breed × range type × species interactions.  
Body weight is assumed to be a good measure of the response to SFR. The following 
dummy Figures for the daily body weight gain (g) of birds subjected to the factors 
enumerated above are analysed as an example. 
 
 
 
 
29
 
TABLE VII. DAILY BODY WEIGHT GAIN OF BIRDS ON DIFFERENT RANGE TYPES. 
    Replicates Treatment total 
Breed Species Range type 1 2 3  
Local Chicken Shrub 1.11 1.35 1.04 3.50 ( a) 
  Grass 1.36 1.58 2.60 5.54 ( b) 
  Mixture 1.05 1.60 1.92 4.57( c) 
 Duck Shrub 3.05 3.65 2.92 9.62 ( d) 
  Grass 3.46 4.06 4.76 12.28 ( e) 
  Mixture 2.50 2.48 2.36 7.34 ( f) 
 Guinea Fowl Shrub 1.56 1.76 1.60 4.92 ( g)  
  Grass 1.68 1.34 1.78 4.80 ( h) 
  Mixture 4.08 3.67 4.12 11.87 ( i) 
Exotic Chicken Shrub 5.81 5.48 5.39 16.68 ( j) 
  Grass 4.84 5.95 5.01 15.80 ( k) 
  Mixture 3.58 2.95 1.06 7.59 ( l) 
 Duck Shrub 2.67 2.56 3.05 8.28 ( m) 
  Grass 4.67 5.05 4.99 14.71 ( n) 
  Mixture 3.46 2.38 3.04 8.88 ( o) 
 Guinea Fowl Shrub 1.12 2.13 4.05 7.30 ( p)  
  Grass 2.59 3.48 4.15 10.22 ( q) 
  Mixture 3.13 4.51 3.56 11.20 ( r) 
Replicate total 51.72 55.98 57.40 GT = 165.10 
a,b,c… These are used to simplify the calculations for ANOVA 
 
ANOV A 
 
Correction Factor (CF) = (165.10)2 / 54 = 504.78 
Total sum of squares (SS) = (1.112 + 1.352 +…+ 4.51 2 + 3.562) – CF = 103.54 
Treatment SS = (a2 + b2 +…+r 2)/3 – CF = 89.10 
Replicates SS = (51.722 + 55.982 + 57.402) / 18 – CF = 0.97 
Error SS = 103.54 – 89.10 – 0.97 = 13.47 
TABLE VII (I)  ANOVA FOR SPECIES × RANGE TYPE.  
Species  Row total 
 Shrub Grass Mixture  
Chicken a+j  b+k  c+l  53.68 
Duck d+m e+n f+o 61.11 
Guinea Fowl g+p h+q  i+r  50.31 
Column total 50.3 63.35 51.45  
Summary for the table of Species × Range type ANOV A 
Total SS = (20.182 + 21.342 +…+ 23.07 2) / 6 – CF = 33.49 
Range type SS = (50.32 + 63.352 + 51.452) / 18 – CF = 5.80 
Species SS = (53.682 + 61.112 + 50.312) / 18 – CF = 3.45 
Range × Species SS = 33.49 – 5.80 – 3.45 = 24.24 
 
 
 
30
 
TABLE VII (II) ANOVA FOR SPECIES × BREED.  
Species Breed 
Chicken Duck Guinea fowl 
 
Breed total 
Local a+b+c  d+e+f  g+h+i  64.44 
Exotic j+k+l  m+n+o  p+q+r  100.67 
Species total 53.69 61.11 50.31  
Summary for the table of Species × Breed ANOV A 
Total SS = (13.612 + 29.242 +…+ 28.72 2) / 9 – CF = 45.78 
Breed SS = (64.442 + 100.672) / 27 – CF = 24.37 
Species SS = 3.45 
Breed × Species SS = 45.78 – 24.37 –3.45 = 17.96 
TABLE VII (III) ANOVA FOR BREED × RANGE TYPE. 
Range type Breed 
Shrub Grass Mixture 
Breed total 
Local a+d+g b+e+h c+f+l 64.44 
Exotic j+m+p k+n+q l+o+r 100.66 
Range total 50.30 63.35 51.45  
Summary for the table of Species × Breed ANOV A 
Total SS = (18.04
2 + 2.622 +…+ 27.67 2)/9 – CF = 36.10 
Breed × Range SS = 36.10 – 24.37 – 5.80 = 5.93 
 
The following summary is for the three-factor interaction ANOVA  
Breed × Range × Species SS =  
Treatment SS – Breed SS – Range SS – Species SS – Breed × Species SS – Range × Species SS – 
Breed × Range SS, i.e. 
Breed × Range × Species SS = 89.10 – 24.39 – 3.45 – 5.8 – 17.96 – 24.24 – 5.93 = 7.33  
TABLE VIII. SUMMARY ANOVA FOR THE HYPOTHETICAL STUDY. 
Source of variation Degrees of 
freedom 
SS Mean Square 
(MS) 
F ratio Remark 
Total 53 103.54 – –  
Replicates 2 0.97 – –  
Breed 1 24.39 24.39 60.98 NS 
Species 2 3.45 1.725 4.313 NS 
Range  2 5.80 2.90 7.25 NS 
Breed × Species 2 17.96 8.98 22.45 NS 
Range × Species 4 24.24 6.06 15.15 NS 
Breed × Range 2 5.93 2.965 7.41 * 
Breed ×Range × Species 4 7.33 1.833 4.58 NS 
Error 34 13.47 0.40 –  
NS – Not significant (p>0.05) 
* – significant (p≤0.05) 
 
Only the Breed × Range interaction was significant (p ≤0.05) in this hypothetical 
study. 
 
31
 
RESULTS 
Olukosi (2002) used pitfall traps to identif y and quantify the insects and metazoans 
available to scavenging chickens on free range in four villages in southwestern Nigeria (Table 
IX). The insects trapped in the pitfall jar traps belonged to the orders hymenoptera, 
orthoptera, diptera, isoptera a nd coleoptera, while the metazo ans trapped include earthworm 
and molluscs (Fig. 6).  
TABLE IX.  NUMBER AND PROPORTIONS OF INSECTS AND METAZOANS TRAPPED IN 
THE SOUTHWESTERN NIGERIA.  
Village  Total number (/m 2/day) % insects % metazoans 
Moro 52 91.83 8.17 
Yakooyo 68 96.34 3.66 
Ipetumodu1 37 97.62 2.38 
Ipetumodu2 63 96.41 3.59 
 55±14 95.55 4.45 
Source: Olukosi, 2002 
 
Distribution of insects and metazoans in the pitfall 
traps in southwestern Nigeria
Gryllidae
9%
Hymenoptera
41%
Othoptera
2%
Thysanoptera
19%
Araneae
2%
Coleptera
8%
Diptera
3%
Isoptera
1% Metazoan
15%
 
FIG. 6. Distribution of fauna in a pitfall trap arena in southwestern Nigeria (Source: Olukosi (2002) 
DISCUSSION 
Tadelle (1996) assumed the main components of the SFR to be insects, worms, seeds, 
plant materials etc with very small amounts of  grain and HHL. The amount and availability 
per bird of this SFR are significantly dependent on season, grain availability in the household, 
time of grain sowing and harvest, and the biomass of the village flock.  
TABLE X.  EFFECT OF SEASON ON PHYSICAL COMPONENTS OF THE CROP OF 
SCAVENGING LOCAL HENS IN THE CENTRAL HIGHLANDS OF ETHIOPIA. 
 Physical components (% fresh basis) 
Season Seeds Plants Worms Insects Others 
Short rain 37.5 22.5 2.6 14.6 22.7 
Rain 25.8 31.8 11.2 7.7 23.4 
Dry 29.5 27.7 6.2 11.1 25.6 
Mean 30.9 23.3 6.7 11.1 23.9 
32
 
 Physical components (% fresh basis) 
Season Seeds Plants Worms Insects Others 
S.E. 7.9 6.0 4.5 4.5 4.6 
Altitude      
High 33.2 28.2 9.0 8.8 20.8 
Medium 32.0 27.9 5.9 11.5 22.7 
Low 27.7 25.8 5.1 13.1 28.3 
Mean 31.0 27.4 6.8 11.2 23.6 
S.E. 3.6 0.8 2.2 2.3 3.4 
Source: Tadelle, 1996 
TABLE XI EFFECT OF SEASON AND ALTITUDE ON CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CROP 
CONTENT OF SCAVENGING CHICKENS IN CENTRAL HIGHLANDS OF ETHIOPIA. 
 Season  Altitude   
 Short rain Rain Dry SE High Medium Low Mean Range 
DM, % 54.1 a 39.7 b 61.0 0.013 43.8 50.9 58.6 50.7 26.4–85.8 
CP, % 8.7 ab 10.2 b 7.6 a 0.021 9.8 8.8 7.9 8.8 4.3–15.4 
CF, % 10.3 a 9.9 b 10.5 c 0.014 9.6 10.2 11.0 10.2 6.5–14.0 
EE, % 2.3 a 1.7 b 1.2 c 0.039 1.97 1.62 1.52 1.9 0.3–4.7 
Ash, % 5.5 a 10.8 b 8.1 c 0.022 9.4 7.5 6.8 7.8 1.6–15.7 
Ca, % 0.7 a 1.1 b 0.8 a 0.035 0.91 0.95 0.71 0.9 0.2–1.9 
P, % 0.5 a 0.7 b 0.7 b 0.031 0.48 0.74 0.63 0.6 0.1–2.4 
Calculated ME, 
kcal/kg 
3128a 2713 d 2751 14.87 2880 b 2897 b 2816 c 2864 2245–3528
abc – means in the same row with different superscripts are significantly different (p≤0.05) 
Source: Tadelle, 1996 
INDIRECT METHODS OF ASSESSING THE SFR 
The MPE method 
Given the difficulty of determining the am ount of HHL and the biota per unit area to 
which each flock has access to scavenge, the di rect method of assessing SFR is cumbersome, 
time consuming and inaccurate. The MPE met hod only requires the calculation of the amount 
of energy required to support the maintenance and production of the chickens in the flock. 
That means that if there is scavengeable feed available, the actual amount of the scavengeable 
feed consumed by the birds is related to their energy requirement for maintenance, growth 
and egg laying. In the absence of any other sour ce of feed, the daily consumption of the flock 
is the SFR. 
The SFR (kg/family flock/year) derived from calculations based on live performance 
of the birds is obtained using Roberts (1992) formula: 
s
j
E
ESFRB ∑=   
where: SFRB = Scavengeable feed resource base (kg/family flock/year) 
 j  = average flock size 
 E  = the ME requirement for the daily ma intenance and production of each bird 
(kcal/bird) 
 E s = the ME in the scavenged feed (kcal/kg dry weight). 
33
 
The E j is calculated from the data on performance and productivity of scavenging 
chickens obtained over a period of eight weeks using the formula of NRC (1994): 
 
EEWTWE 07.25.5)95.1173(75.0 +∆+−=   
 
where: E = E j defined above 
 W = average body weight (kg) 
  T = ambient temperature ( °C) 
∆W = body weight gain (g/bird/day) 
  EE = daily egg mass (g). 
 
The Es (kcal/kg) is calculated from the gross energy (GE, kcal/kg) value of the crop 
content. The ME value is calculated from the GE value using, for example, the formula of 
Carrel 
et al (1989): 
CFCPGEME 5.1095.18913.6 −−=   
 
where: ME = metabolizable energy (kcal/kg) 
GE  = gross energy (kcal/kg) 
CP  = % crude protein 
CF  = % crude fibre. 
 
Sonaiya et al  (2002b) determined the SFR using the calculations based on the formula of 
Roberts (1992) as follows: 
 
SFR = ∑Ej/Es 
 
Where: j is the average number of birds in the family flock 
 E is the ME requirement for the daily ma intenance and production of each bird per 
day, kcal/kg dry matter. 
 Es is the ME in the scavenging feed, kcal/kg dry weight 
 j was determined from a census of family flock, using the questionnaires 
 Es was estimated from crop content 
 E was calculated for each bird from th e data of growth rate and egg production 
collected weekly from the cooperators' flocks. 
The formula of National Research C ouncil (1984) was used in estimating the 
ME/bird/day as follows: 
ME/bird/day=W
0.75(173–1.95T)+5.5∆W + 2.07EE 
 
where: W is the average body weight, kg 
 T is the ambient temperature, 26 0C was assumed throughout 
 ∆W is the change in body weight, g/day 
 EE is the daily egg mass, g/day 
From the census of the family flock, the average number of birds in each class (i.e. 
cocks, hens, growers, and chicks) was determined. The daily egg mass (96 kcal for a large 
egg, 36 kcal for a small egg) was not included in  the determination of ME requirement of all 
classes of birds, except hens. The ME require ment calculated for each bird (E) was then 
34
 
multiplied by the average number of birds (j) in the particular class to determine E J and the 
summation of all the ME requirement for all the classes of birds was used in estimating ∑Ej 
(Table XII). 
TABLE XII. DETERMINATION OF ΣEJ (KCAL ME/KG) FOR SCAVENGING CHICKENS IN 
THE VILLAGES.  
Village  Category of 
bird 
W (kg) ∆W (b/bird/day) EE (g) E (kcal/bird) j Ej 
(kcal/day) 
Moro Cocks 0.941 3.36 – 135.3 2.8 378.9 
 Hens 0.806 0.8 6.90 122.7 3.4 417.7 
 Growers 0.701 6.0 – 126.7 5.3 671.5 
 Chicks 0.040 0.8 – 15.3 6.3 96.39 
ΣEj       1564 
Yakooyo        
 Cocks  1.001 3.6 – 142.2 2.7 383.9 
 Hens 0.813 0.9 12.6 135.8 3.6 488.9 
 Growers  0.641 6.4 – 122.8 4.9 601.7 
 Chicks  0.075 2.2 – 29.6 6.4 189.4 
ΣEj       1664 
Ipetu 1 Cocks 0.966 2.4 – 132.4 1.7 225.1 
 Hens 0.889 1.2 9.02 137.3 3.4 466.8 
 Growers 0.621 5.4 – 115.3 4.3 495.8 
 Chicks 0.087 3.3 – 37.7 6.9 260.1 
ΣEj       1448 
Ipetu 2 Cocks 1.034 2.9 – 141.4 1.4 198.0 
 Hens  0.831 2.2 12.73 144.9 2.8 405.7 
 Growers  0.642 7.9 – 131.2 4.4 577.2 
 Chicks  0.136 3.8 – 48.3 5.0 241.5 
ΣEj       1422 
Source: Olukosi (2002) 
TABLE XIII.  AMOUNT OF SCAVENGEABLE FEED RESOURCE IN FOUR VILLAGES IN 
SOUTHWESTERN NIGERIA. 
Village SFR 
 g/flock/day kg/year 
Moro 520 190 
Yakooyo 718 262 
Ipetumodu 1 510 186 
Ipetumodu 2 395 144 
Average  535±134 196 ±49 
Source: Olukosi (2002) 
 
In the study of Gunaratne et al (1993), during which each family flock had access to 
the waste from 2 households, the hen day egg pr oduction for all hens was 30% (with a range 
of 11–57) and did not vary significantly duri ng the 12 months of the study. Chick body 
weight at 20 d ranged from 41 to 100g, at 70 d from 142 to 492. Mortality rate was 65% 
within 70 days. Losses were attributed mainly  to predators, particularly dogs, cats, 
mongooses, crows and raptors. More than 90% of the hen’s day was spent scavenging over a 
radius of 110–175 m. The stalls of cattle and goats were favourite scavenging areas. 
35
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The village flock owners who cooperated w ith us in the case study are gratefully 
acknowledged. The assistance of Mr. O.A. Olukosi in the preparation of  this manual and his 
willingness to make portions of his thesis available are both acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
AOAC (ANALYSIS OF OFFICIAL ANALYTICAL  CHEMISTS), Official Methods of 
Analysis. Washington, D.C., 1994. 
CARREL et al., as cited by Larbier and Leclercq (1992), 1989. 
FELTWELL, R., FOX, S., Practical poultry feeding. Faber and Faber Ltd., London, (1978) 
36–49. 
GUNARATNE, S.P., et al ., The feed resource base for scavenging village chickens in Sri 
Lanka. Tropical Animal Health and Production, 26 (1993) 249–257. 
JANVIRIYASOPAK, O., et al ., A health and productivity stud y of village poultry. Proc. 
International Seminar on Animal Health  and Production Services for Village 
Livestock. Khon Kaen, Thailand, (1989) 161–171. 
KINGSTON, D.J., CRESSWELL, D.C., Indigenous chickens in Indonesia: population and 
production characteristics in five village in West Java. Research Institute for Animal 
Production, Bogor, Indonesia, Report No. 2 (1982) 3–8. 
KIRSOPP-REED, K., A review of  PRA methods for livestock research and development. 
RRA Notes 20 (1994) 11–36. 
KITALYI, A.J., Village Chicken Production Syst ems in Africa – Household Food Security 
and Gender Issues, FAO (Food and Agricultu re Organization of the United Nations) 
Animal Production and Health Paper 142, Rome, Italy, 1998. 
LARBEIR, M., LECLERCQ, C., Nutrition and Feeding of Poultry, Nottingham University 
Press, U.K., 1992. 
NRC (NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL), Nutrient requirement of poultry. Subcommittee 
on Poultry Nutrition. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994. 
NRI 1996 (NATIONAL RESOURCES INSTITUTE), A guide to insect pest of Nigerian crop. 
Identification, biology and control, Chatham, U.K. 
OBEN-OFORI, D., The behaviour of nine stored  product beetles at pitfall trap arenas and 
their capture in millet. Entomological Experimentalis et Applicata 73 (1994) 39–50. 
OLUKOSI, O.A., A multisystem approach to the determination of the nutritional base for 
scavenging family poultry. MPhil Thesis, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, 2002. 
PRAWIROKUSUMO, S., Problems to improve sm all scale native chickens management in 
South-east Asian countries. Proc. XVIII World’s Poultry Congress, Japan, (1988) 
113–116. 
ROBERTS, J.A., The scavenging feed resource  base in assessment of the productivity of 
scavenging chickens. In: Spradbrow E.B. (ed) Newcastle disease in Village Chickens: 
Control with Thermostable Oral Vaccines. Proc. International Workshop held in Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, Oct 6–10, 1991, ACIAR Proc. No. 39 (1992) 29–32. 
ROBERTS, J.A., Utilisation of feed resources by samm holders in the villages of developing 
countries. In: Dolberg, F and Petersen, P. H. (eds). Poultry as a tool in poverty 
eradication and promotion of  gender equality. Proceeding s The Danish Agricultural 
and Rural Development Adviser’s Forum.  Tune, Landboskole, Denmark. March 22–
26, 1999, (1999) 311–335, www.ihh.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune99/28-Roberts.htm 
36
 
ROBERTS, J.A., GUNARATNE, S.P., The scavenging feed resource base for village 
chickens in a developing country. Proceedi ngs of the XIX World’s Poultry Congress, 
Amsterdam, 1992. 
ROBERTS, J.A., SENARATNE, R., The succe ssful introduction of hybrid egg laying 
chickens into a Sri Lankan village. Proceedings XIX World’s Poultry Congress, 
Amsterdam, 1 (1992) 818–821. 
SONAIYA, E.B., Feed resources for small hol der poultry in Nigeria. World Animal Review.  
1 (1995) 25–33. www.fao.org/livestock/agap/war/warall/V4440b/v4440b0a.htm 
SONAIYA, E.B., Family poultry and food securi ty: Research Requirements in Science, 
Technology and Socioeconomics. (CD Proc. XXI World’s Poultry Congress, Montreal, 
Canada, Aug. 22–24, 2000), (2000), code: s2.3.05. 
SONAIYA, E.B., et al ., Further assessment of scavenging feed resource base. In: 
Characteristics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa, Results of a 
FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Progra mme. IAEA, Vienna, Austria, (2002a) 193–
200. www.iaea.or.at/programmes/nafa/d3/public/20-further-sonaiya.pdf  
SONAIYA, E.B., et al., Vaccination and scavengeable feed resourcement for village poultry, 
(Proceedings of the 3 rd Scientific Coordinated Research  Project on Assessment of the 
Assessment of the Effectiveness of Vaccination Strategies Against Newcastle Disease 
and Gumboro Disease using Immuno-assay Techniques for Increasing Farmyard 
poultry Production in Africa, Quatre Bornes, Mauritius, May 6–10, 2002 (2002b), 
www.iaea.org/programmes/nafa/d3/mtc/sonaiya-doc.pdf 
TADELLE, D., Studies on village poultry production systems in the central highlands of 
Ethiopia, M Sc. Thesis, Department of An imal Nutrition and Management of Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, (1996). 
 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
AOAC – Association of Official Analytical Chemists 
Aviary – A type of housing used for birds which pr ovides an enclosure that gives a level of 
natural, wild environment for the birds. Th ere are provision for perches and nests for the 
birds’ comfort. 
Cafeteria type feeding  – The kind of feeding of chickens that allows them to select and 
balance their own feed intake. This is achieve d by providing different feed materials that 
supplies different nutrients in se parate containers and allowing the chickens to select freely 
from the containers. 
Fauna – The types of living organisms apart from plants found in an area 
HHL – Household leftovers. This defines the qu antity of kitchen leftovers that each family 
has at the end of a 24-hour period. 
IFOAM – International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement 
Ingesta – This represents the feed materials in the gastro intestinal tract of an animal 
MPE – Maintenance and Production Energy 
Niche market – A specialized market for a product 
NRC – National Research Council 
Pitfall trap  – This is a standard entomological method of sampling th e types and probable 
number of insects in a given area. It makes us e of jars immersed to just below the ground 
level as traps for mainly crawling insects. 
Voluntary Feed Intake  – This is the quantity of feed that a chicken consumes by itself 
without being forced. 
37
 
DISEASE CONTROL STRATEGIES IN THE SMALLHOLDER LIVESTOCK 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN FIVE SOUTHERN DISTRICTS OF 
BANGLADESH 
J.G. BELL 
Smallholder Livestock Development Project in Five Southern Districts Pashusampad 
Bhaban, Krishikhamar Sarak, Farmgate, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Abstract  
The disease control strategies of the project are centered around the ‘poultry worker’ or 
vaccinator who receives training and a vaccination kit, and earns income from her vaccinations. 
Vaccinations for chickens are given against three key diseases: infectious bursal disease, Newcastle 
disease and fowl pox, and ducks are vaccinated against duck plague. It has been necessary to adapt the 
vaccination programme several times, particularly to control infectious bursal disease. The farmers 
receive the support of government veterinarians and livestock officers in the diagnosis of diseases. 
Normal bio security measures are applied to the small parent farms supplying hatching eggs and to the 
chick rearing units. Vertically transmitted diseases are controlled through monitoring of grandparent 
stock. A programme of parallel research undertaken by national institutions provides information to 
support the adaptation of disease control strategies. The practical application of these strategies is 
discussed, and the importance of them in a project providing credit for family poultry production is 
emphasised. 
INTRODUCTION 
The constant threat of disease makes poultr y rearing an inherently risky business. 
Therefore it could be questioned why, in a cr edit programme for poor people, smallholder 
poultry production is promoted as an enterprise. Th e answer is that it can only be promoted if 
a comprehensive disease control programme is in place. While most of the other papers in 
these proceedings report the results of rese arch on family poultry production, this paper 
reports the practical strategies that have been developed and are in use in a relatively large 
scale family poultry project. 
The Smallholder Livestock Development Proj ect in Five Southern  Districts targets 
more than 100,000 people in its area of operation.  Ninety five percent of these are known as 
‘key rearers’ and operate an enterprise in two parts: firstly they keep five semi-scavenging 
hybrid laying hens, and secondly they use four  large indigenous broody hens to hatch exotic 
fertile eggs. The chicks from these eggs are raised under a protected environment using creep 
feeding, and are then sold for meat, or used to replace the laying hens. The hatching eggs are 
supplied from an enterprise known as ‘model br eeder’ which is a smal l scale parent farm 
comprising a total of 60 of the two parent bird s required to produce the hybrid. An alternative 
source of the hybrid hens is from an enterprise  known as ‘chick rearer’ which raises 300 day 
old hybrid chicks produced by government poultry farms. A similar system is in operation 
using ducks, except that a pure breed is used. These are the enterprises involving live birds 
which have to be protected from disease. 
38
 
STRATEGIES 
Vaccinators 
The core of the disease control strategy is the ‘poultry worker,’ a vaccinator who is 
herself recruited from the same community as the key rerears. There is one poultry worker for 
every 40 key rearers. She is supplied with a vaccination kit, comprising a thermos flask to 
keep the vaccines cool during transporta tion, dropper bottles for eye drop vaccination, an 
automatic syringe with needles for injectable vaccines, a bifurcated needle for wing web 
vaccination, a measuring cylinder and bottles for dilution of vaccine, and a carrying box. She 
is also supplied with a distinctive yellow umbrella bearing the extension slogans of the project 
which can be roughly translated as ‘give vaccine, get money’ and ‘give feed, get profit.’ She 
receives ten days practical training under th e supervision of an area manager who is a 
veterinary or animal husbandry gr aduate. The area manager himself, as well as the extension 
workers whom he supervises are given a central ised training of trainers course. The poultry 
worker makes an income from making a small charge for each vaccination, which can also be 
paid for in kind, such as with eggs. Her busin ess need not be limited to farmers involved in 
the project; indeed it is to their advantage that other farmers’ poultry surrounding their 
enterprises be vaccinated. 
Vaccination programme 
Unlike programmes designed for intens ive poultry production, vaccination for 
chickens is given against only three key dise ases: Newcastle disease, infectious bursal 
disease, and fowl pox. The detailed vaccination programme currently recommended in use for 
chickens is given in Table I. 
TABLE I. CHICKEN VACCINATION PROGRAMME. 
Age Disease Vaccine Route of inoculation 
1 day Infectious bursal 
disease 
Bursaplex Subcutaneous injection 
1–7 days Newcastle disease Baby chick Ranikhet vaccine 
(lentogenic) 
Eye drop 
3–7 days Fowl pox Pigeon pox Wing web 
10–12 days Infectious bursal 
disease 
228E (intermediate) Eye drop 
1 month Fowl pox Fowl pox Wing web 
2 months Newcastle diseas e Ranikhet disease vaccine 
(mesogenic) 
Intramuscular injection 
 
Ducks are given only duck plague vaccine, at about 2 weeks of age, as a 1ml injection 
in the breast muscle, with a booster dose about 2 weeks later. 
Veterinary support 
Each administrative sub-district or ‘upazila’ is provided with an ‘upazila livestock 
development centre’ where a local government livestock officer and veterinary surgeon are 
based. In case of disease they can be consulted for a diagnosis. Motorcycles for their transport 
are provided by the project. 
39
 
Bio security 
Not all of the sort of bio security measur es practised in industrial poultry farms are 
applicable to these small family enterprises. However, model breeders and chick rearers do 
have to go through the normal procedures of  cleaning and disinfecting their chickens houses 
after each lot, and leaving them empty for 3 week s. Moreover, disinfectant foot dips are used 
and entry to the chicken house is limited to the person actually tending the birds. Care is taken 
to quarantine new birds for at least 7 days, and to dispose of birds that have died through 
disease by burying them. 
Vertically transmitted diseases 
In addition to the 3 viral diseases mentioned above, the birds are at risk from vertically 
transmitted diseases, particularly salmonellosis and mycoplasmosis. The risk comes from the 
government farms from which the parent stock is supplied to the model breeders. The strategy 
here is to avoid supplying birds from contamin ated farms and to main tain grandparent stock 
under higher bio security conditions, including restricted access and special clothing for 
workers. The grandparent stock is regularly tested for Salmonellosis and Mycoplasmosis. 
Research 
Finally, an important part of the disease control strategy is parallel ongoing research. 
The project supports both applied research cont racts with national institutions, and research 
fellowships for Masters students. The latter provide a very flexible framework through which 
small applied research projects can be carried out. Examples of ongoing research projects 
pertaining to disease control are one on the causes of mortality in the chicks raised by broody 
hens, and one on the epidemiology of bacterial di seases in the small parent farms. The results 
of these research programmes can be used to adapt disease control strategies. 
DISCUSSION 
The previous section describes the strategies that have been adopted to control disease; 
now the extent to which they have been successful, and the extent to which they have been 
adapted will be discussed. 
Although a cost benefit analysis can easily s how that the investment in vaccination is 
cost effective, this is not always evident to the poultry worker’s customers, and in some but 
not all areas they have had initial difficulties in starting the business going. A general leaflet 
is being prepared outlining the advantages of vaccination for distribution through ‘resource 
learning centres’ along with ex tension material for other type s of farming, and this should 
have a positive impact on the vaccination business. 
The vaccination programme presented above has been adapted several times since the 
beginning of the project. Initially for Newcastle  disease imported heat resistant V4 vaccine 
and inactivated vaccine was promoted. However there was a difficulty in getting people to 
accept these because, although they were cost effective, they were undercut in price by the 
Newcastle vaccines produced by the government. Th is is in turn led to a problem of shortage 
of vaccine because of the erratic production and distribution of the government vaccines, 
highlighting the danger of the government subs idies for vaccines. The problem has now been 
more or less overcome, at least for Newcastle di sease, by the supply of vaccines from a local 
private manufacturing company. Although vaccines from different sources have been used, 
40
 
there has been essentially no problem in controlling Newcastle disease; very few cases have 
arisen. This has not unfortunately been the case  for infectious bursal disease, whose control 
has been much more difficult, no doubt in part due to the serological variation which the virus 
undergoes. The first vaccination programme suggested was vaccination of chicks at about one 
week of age with a mild strain of vaccine. When cases of the disease occurred in spite of this 
vaccination the programme was changed to one which had been successful in industrial farms, 
vaccination at the age of one day at the farm with ‘Bursaplex,’ a vaccine promoted for this 
purpose. However, more recently cases of disease have appeared even with this vaccine, 
which led to the recommendation to give a second vaccination w ith an intermediate strain. 
The chicks raised by broody hens were found to  be much more susceptible to fowl pox then 
the chicks raised in larger numbers in the chick rearing units. This may be due to 
contamination from the broody hen. Thus particular care had to be taken to vaccinate the 
chicks raised by broody hens. All the preceding discussion shows the importance of flexibility 
when using a vaccination programme: it is not sufficient to adopt a fixed programme from the 
beginning; it must be adapted whenever necessary. 
The collaboration between the government ve terinary and livestock officials and the 
project personnel has been very good in the best of cases, as evidenced by the good 
knowledge of the government officials with the cases of the different farmers. However, it has 
depended on the quality of the individuals involved. 
Despite the precautions taken, cases of Salmonellosis did arise amongst parent birds. 
This underlined the inherent difficulties in enfo rcing the discipline necessary for bio security 
in a government (other than military) environment. However, treatment was possible in these 
cases. 
Experience in collaborating with academic institutions in applied research 
programmes has shown that it is important for the project personnel to have a regular dialogue 
with the researchers to keep the research practically orientated, lest it become too academic. 
Research seminars, as well as practical contact in the field, provide suitable forums for this 
dialogue. 
It is hoped that this discussion of the strategi es used in this project will be helpful for 
those embarking on new projects of a similar nature. In any case, when we are dealing not 
only with the birds of the poorest of people, but also with birds purchased on credit, it is of 
paramount importance to give the utmost attention to disease control strategies. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The Smallholder Livestock Development Pr oject in Five Southern Districts is 
supported by Danish Interna tional Development Assistance (DANIDA) and the Government 
of Bangladesh. 
41
 
EXPERIENCES IN USING POULTRY AS A TOOL FOR POVERTY 
ALLEVIATION AT VILLAGE LEVEL — HOW TO ENABLE POOR 
WOMEN TO INCREASE THEIR INCOME 
A. PERMIN, J.C. RIISE , K.N. KRYGER, I. ASSOUMANE, T.W. SCHOU 
Network for Smallholder Poultry Development, Frederiksberg, Denmark  
 
Abstract 
The Danida-financed Network for Smallholder Poultry Development (NSPD) has several 
years of experience in supporting family poultry development at village level by focusing on poor, in 
particular poor women. Traditionally women are caretakers of poultry in most poor countries. The 
poor mainly own small flocks of poultry: Poultry with a minimal production output. NSPD has 
developed a strategy, which involves not only disease control or introduction of improved breeds, but 
a holistic approach also taking social, cultural, marketing, credit and general management aspects into 
consideration. The tools to develop family poultry range from sensitisation of village groups and 
organisation of women in poultry groups to training of village vaccinators, farmer field schools for 
poor illiterate women, organisation of local vendors, use of private veterinarians, and finally 
involvement of national research, education and extension institutions. Results from Bangladesh, 
Vietnam, Benin, Senegal, Burkina Faso, Togo and Kenya are very promising in terms of creating non-
subsidised activities with clear benefits for poor farmers as well as local entrepreneurs. 
Keywords: Enabling environment, organisation, service delivery, micro finance, marketing, 
disease prevention, feeding 
INTRODUCTION 
Poultry production in most tropical count ries is based mainly on scavenging 
production systems. It has been estimated that 80% of the poultry population in Africa is 
found in traditional scavenging systems (Gueye, 1998; Gueye 2000). Women and children are 
generally in charge of poultry husbandry (Anon, 2002). The birds scavenge in the vicinity of 
the homestead during daytime where they may be given sorghum, millet, maize bran, broken 
grains, or other waste products as supplementary feed. The leve l of productivity is very low 
compared to high-input systems; scavenging he ns lay 30 eggs per year, while industrialised 
battery hens lay up to 300 eggs annually. Furthermore, it may take up to 12 months to raise a 
chicken for consumption. These production sy stems are entitled ‘low input-low output’ 
systems (Pandey, 1992). A range of factors such as sub-optimal ma nagement, lack of 
supplementary feed, low genetic potential an d diseases (Pandey, 1992; Bagust, 1994 and 
1999; Permin, 1997; Permin and Bisgaard, 1999), causes the low output. Despite the low 
production, scavenging chickens still accounts for a major part of all meat produced in many 
developing countries, where poultry is an important component of rural, peri-urban, and urban 
households. As such poultry plays a big role in rural as well as national economy (FAO, 2000; 
Mlodzi and Minga, 2003). 
PROBLEMS RELATED TO VILLAGE POULTRY PRODUCTION 
The most striking problem in relation to village poultry production is the high 
mortality: Mortality rates may be as high as 80–90% within the first year after hatching 
(Matthewman, 1977; Wilson et al., 1987; Kyvsgaard, 1999). Traditionally,  Newcastle disease 
42
 
(ND) is believed to be the most devastating disease in free-range systems and the main course 
of the high mortality (Minga, 1989; Aini, 1990; Bell et al., 1990; Kabatange and Katule, 
1990; Bell, 1992). Other diseases may also cause high mortality rates in the absense of ND 
(Permin, 1997; Barman, 2002). However, many othe r factors affect the efficiency of poultry 
production either directly or indirectly. These include the genetic constitution of the host, 
nutrition (or malnutrition), envir onment, management and societal pressures that can interact 
in multiple ways influencing the ultimate produc tivity level, the overa ll mortality rate, the 
quality of the final product and marketin g aspects (Calnek, 1998; Anon, 2002; Schou, 2004; 
Assoumane, 2004). Successful poultry production (and other agricultural business) includes 
the possibility of obtaining loans for further investments and improvements of the production. 
In village production only small loans are need ed, but they are mostly impossible for the 
producers to get (Fattah, 1999). The village poultry production and the problems related 
thereto can be scheduled as in Fig. 1 (Permin and Pedersen, 2000). 
 
 
FIG. 1. The village poultry production and the problems related thereto 
 
Village poultry production has over the year s attracted some a ttention due to the 
enormous potential for increasing the output vi s-à-vis the relatively low output at present. 
However, the view has been that traditi onal village poultry production could only be 
improved by preventing few diseases in the flocks and/or supplementing with feed. This point 
of view has, however, not lead to an increased production. The reasons for this lack of success 
may be quite obvious if Fig. 1 is analysed. Disease prevention and supplementing feeding 
only constitutes a part of the overall number of problems related to village poultry production. 
Recent experiences from Bangladesh, Vietnam, Benin, Burkina Faso, Senegal, Togo and 
Kenya have shown that it is possible to improve the poultry production at village level 
quickly, although the means to do so may differ from region to region.  
The organisation of the smallholder poultry production support may be divided into a 
production line, a supply line and one or more service lines (Table I). In fact, the major 
challenge for improving poultry production at village level lies in the organisational aspects, 
Village poultry 
production  
Improved 
breeds 
Feed 
Disease 
prevention  
Training 
Savings & credit 
 
Market 
Extension 
services 
43
 
not in the technical. Solutions for technica l problems relating to disease, nutrition and 
management have long been know n and applied in large-scale farming, but how to organize 
the production at village level for the benef it of small-scale farmers with 5–50 chickens 
remains a major task. The vast experience from Bangladesh (Askov-Jensen, 1996; Saleque, 
1996; Alam, 1996 and 1997; Fattah, 1999 and Ahame d, 2000) has shown that it is possible to 
“atomize” an industrial system into small en terprises, whereby poor , often illiterate, women 
producers may earn a living from having only 5–10 egg-laying hens. However, the experience 
from Bangladesh is not directly applicable in an African or even Asian context.  
TABLE I.  THE VILLAGE POULTRY PRODUCTION MODEL. (ADAPTED FROM ASKOV 
JENSEN, 1996) 
Production Supply Service (loc al) Service (government) 
Egg Vaccine/medicine Organisation and 
training of producers  
Training of trainers  
Meat Feed Savings and credit Research 
Dual purpose Chickens (day-old) Marketing  
STRATEGIES FOR SMALLHOLDER POULTRY DEVELOPMENT 
A strategy for poultry development at village is based on a thorough analysis of the 
production in a given country including a market analysis (prices, product desires, deliveries) 
and production analysis (housing systems, di seases, feeds, breeds). The strategy for 
smallholder poultry development will therefore differ from area  to area, from country to 
country based on the market analysis and production analysis. 
The smallholder production line in Bangladesh  usually consists of small-scale egg-
producers (5–10 hens), small-scale chick re arers (200–300 chicks, 0–8 weeks), small-scale 
hatcheries (500–1000 eggs/month)  and small-scale parent stocks (40–60 hens and 6–10 
cocks) (Askov-Jensen, 1996). The integrated “Bangladesh Poultry Model” was developed 
over 20–30 years, and the strategies for starting new approaches in e.g. West Africa have 
naturally been different. Activities in Benin (Chrysostome et al., 2002), Burkina Faso (NSPD, 
2003) and Senegal (Frederiksen and Permin, 2004) were initially organised around local 
chickens or guinea fowl for a dual-purpos e egg and meat production, but with a clear 
marketing strategy focusing on sale of live birds and occasionally eggs for incubation. The 
marketing aspects are important when dea ling with poultry production as an income 
generating activity. Fortunately, most studies  on marketing aspects show no saturation for 
indigenous products on a local or even nationa l level, whereas production of improved meat 
(broilers) or eggs needs more attention on the national and even global markets.  
It is important to stress that when dealing with poultry as a means of addressing 
poverty, the risks involved in starting up or improving the production have to be minimal 
from a producer’s point of view. Introducing ne w high-yielding breeds should be done in a 
careful step-wise manner, ensuring that producers know how to handle disease and 
management problems first. It is also necessary to recognise that the sale of a few eggs per 
day or a few live birds per month should have a remarkable effect on the income at household 
level. Otherwise, it makes little sense to focus on indigenous birds. Learning how to rear 5–50 
local chickens is just the first step out of poverty, not a goal in itself (Dolberg, 2003).  
44
 
INPUT SUPPLIES 
From an organisational point of view, th e supply of vaccines and medicine are 
essential. The first supplier to contract locally will thus be a veterinary service, either private 
or governmental. A veterinary service deliverer  at minimum has to assure a sustained supply 
of vaccines against Newcastle disease (ND) and Fowl Pox, as well as drugs against 
coccidiosis and parasites. If vaccines agains t ND (and other prevailing diseases) cannot be 
delivered according to agreed schedules, sma ll-scale poultry production will never succeed at 
village level (Alders et al., 2002). However, delivery is not  enough, vaccination campaigns 
should preferably cover at least 60–80% of th e poultry population to be effective against 
epidemic diseases, and this calls for the involve ment of veterinary assistants or “barefoot 
vets” to cover the vast number of chickens in the villages. Village poultry programmes in 
Bangladesh have today trained more than 20,000 so-called poultry workers responsible for 
vaccinating village chickens. Recent experience from VSF-Togo (Bebay, 2003) shows that 
village vaccinators may earn a good income fr om vaccinating indigenous birds, and more 
interesting, private veterinarians earn a hi gher profit on selling drugs for poultry than for 
cattle. Feed supplies are anothe r challenge in village-based poultry production systems. By 
reducing the supplementation given to adult birds to 40 g/day or less, the cost of production is 
reduced drastically (NSPD, 2002). It is possibly to  keep up productivity, if adult birds are left 
scavenging for scraps and feeds during the da y. In Bangladesh (Ahmed, 2000; Askov-Jensen, 
1996) feed sellers have been trained in mixing local ingredients to semi-balanced feeds for 
different age-groups. In Burkina Faso (NSPD , 2003) and Benin (Chrysostome et al., 2002), 
small-scale producers were taught how to mix semi-balanced feeds themselves, as well as on 
techniques for collecting termites and growing maggots out of manure and waste.  
To make development sustainable, input s upplies are rarely subsidized. Activities in 
Burkina Faso, Benin and Senegal involved givi ng the first vaccination for free to show 
smallholders that vaccination works. Subseque ntly, vaccines and medication were sold at 
market prices including a vaccination fee for the village vaccinators. Activities in Senegal and 
Benin have involved small loans (30–50 USD/fa rmer) based on the so-called micro-credit 
systems approach, whereby farmers are acting as collateral for each other. Farmers pay back 
loans including an interest of 20–24% within the first year (Frederiksen, 2004; Nielsen, 2003). 
In general subsidies have been given mainly for organisation and training, and rarely for 
“hard” inputs such as housing materials (Frederiksen, 2004).  
SERVICE LINES 
The most important aspects in developi ng village based poultry production systems 
are “the soft parts”, dealing with the so cial, cultural and economic context of the 
smallholders. A slow participatory sensitisation process of all village members, including 
village heads, women, children and men, is an essential starting point for the development of 
village-based poultry production focusing on the poor (Askov-Jensen, 1996; Frederiksen, 
2004). Subsequently, the training aspects of  the service delivery are important. Recent 
experience from Vietnam and Kenya shows how to develop participatory training approached 
for extension personnel as well as farmers base d on the so-called Farmer Field School (FFS) 
principles (Khisa & Ondwasy, 2003; Riise et al., 2004). The basis of the FFS are groups of 
farmers, who decide with or without external  support to start up common-interest- or -self-
help groups, which meet regularly to share ex perience and exchange ideas on how to develop 
their production, market their products etc. Ex perience from e.g. Benin and Senegal show 
45
 
remarkable results on mean flock size after only one year of intervention (Fig. 2 and Table II). 
At the same time, the approach may be highly e fficient in reaching out to poorer segments of 
the villages, as shown in Benin (Nielsen, 2003)  and Bangladesh (Alam, 1997). Last but not 
least, it is crucial to attract national and international research programmes for developing 
village based poultry production systems. Recent results from a multidisciplinary Master of 
Science degree programme in Denmark have been  remarkable in addressing issues relevant 
for small-scale farmers, and at the same time assuring a high standard of research to be 
published internationally (NSPD, 2002). 
Figure 2 Mean size of poultry flocks, Department Donga, 
Benin, 2000-2001
0
10
20
30
40
50
cocks hens pullets chicks total
Mean no. of birds/fa
2001
2000
 
FIG. 2. Mean size of Poultry stock 
TABLE II. MEAN FLOCK SIZE PER FARM AND TOTAL IN THREE VILLAGES IN KOLDA 
REGION, SENEGAL. (FREDERIKSEN, 2004) 
Village Month Cocks Hens Growers Chicks Total Mean/farm 
nov–02 177 117 0 294 13.5 
Diourour dec–03 39 146 188 150 523 17.4 
nov–02 257 159 0 416 14.9 
Bayemba dec–03 42 108 229 155 534 22.3 
nov–02 52 20 0 72 6 
Dioulayel dec–03 33 105 142 235 515 19.1 
CONCLUSION 
There are no secrets in how to improve  village poultry production. By having a 
holistic approach to village poultry developmen t, taking into account technical as well as 
organisational aspects, it is possible within  a relatively short period to develop poultry 
production systems based on locally available re sources, which may help the poorer farmers 
in developing their skills and creating a sustaina ble income with very few inputs. However, it 
requires involvement and commitment to help poor farmers at village level. Projects with long 
time perspectives are needed to ensure the sustainability of village development.  
REFERENCES 
AHAMED, N., The Smallholder Poultry Model in  Bangladesh. Proceedings of the workshop 
on the possibilities for Smallholder Poultry Pr ojects in Eastern and Southern Africa. 
Morogoro, Tanzania, 22–25 May 2000, 71–82. 
46
 
AINI, I., (1990). Indigenous chicken production in  South-East Asia. World’s Poultry Science 
Journal, 46:51–57. 
ALAM, J., (1996). Socio-Economic Impact of Smallholder Livestock Development Project. 
Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute, January 1996. 
ALAM, J., (1997). Impact of smallholder livesto ck development project in some selected 
areas of rural Bangladesh. Livestoc k for Rural Development, 9 Nr.3, 1997. 
(http://www.cipav.org.co/lrrd/lrrd9/3/bang932.htm). 
ALDERS, R., DOS ANJOS, F., BAGNOL, B., FUMO, A., MATA, B., YOUNG, M. (2002) 
Controlling Newcastle Disease in Village Chickens: A Training Manual. ACIAR 
monograph No. 86, 128 pp. 
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, (2002). Improving Village Poultry 
Production. Proceedings from an IAEA Workshop. Mauritius 2002. 
ASKOV-JENSEN, H. Semi-Scavenging Poultry Flock. Proceedings of an ARDAF Workshop, 
March 25–29, 1996, Tune Landboskole, Denmark 
(http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune96/4askovjensen.htm). 
ASSOUMANE, I.. The effect of nutrition on the es tablishment of infections in the chicken 
gut. PhD-thesis (in prep). 2004. 
BAGUST, T.J. Improving health for a poultry indu stry in Asia: a develo pmental perspective. 
Avian pathology 23(1994).: 395–404. 
BAGUST, T.J. Village and free-range poultr y in health and disease. Commonwealth 
Veterinary Association: Regional work shop on livestock production in the South 
Pacific Islands 27–30 October 1999. 
BARMAN, L. Studies on the epidemiology of Newcastle disease in village chickens in 
Bangladesh. MSc-thesis. The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, Denmark. 
(2002). 
BEBAY, C. Deliverance de services veterinaries de proximité au Togo. Veterinarires Sans 
Frontiers, Togo. (2003). 
BELL, J.G. The village chicken and disease co ntrol. Tanzanian Veterinary Journal, (1992) 
12:44–47. 
BELL, J.G., KANE,M., LE JAN, C.  An investigation of the Disease Status of Village Poultry 
in Mauritania. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 8(1990), 291–294. 
CALNEK, B.W., (1998). Improving productivity in  a changing world. Proceedings of the 
Fourth Asia Pacific Poultry Health Conference. Melbourne 22–26 November, 1–10. 
CHRYSOSTOME, C., RIISE, J.C., PERMIN, A. Semi scavenging poultry model - the 
experience in Benin. Network for Sma llholder Poultry Development. Second 
FAO/INFPD Electronic Conference On Family Poultry. Free Communications. (2002) 
(http://www.fao.org/ag/aga/AGAP/LPA/fampo1/econf/econf2/D13.htm).  
DOLBERG, F. Review of Household Poultry Production as a Tool in Poverty Reduction with 
Focus on Bangladesh and India. Pro-poor  Livestock Policy Initiative. PPLPI wkg 
Paper No.6. FAO.34 (2003) 
http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/projects/en/pplpi/docarc/wp6.pdf. 
FAO FAOstat. Statistical database of Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United 
Nations, Rome. (2004). 
FATTAH, K.A. Poultry as a tool in Poverty Eradication and Promoti on of Gender Equality. 
Poultry as a tool in Poverty Eradica tion and Promotion of Gender Equality. 
Proceedings of a Workshop, (1999). March 22–26, Tune Landboskole, Denmark, 
p.16–28. 
FREDERIKSEN, L. Short presentation of Sm allholder Poultry Projects in Senegal. 
Proceedings from NSPD seminar, 18 March 2004. Network for Smallholder Poultry 
Development (in press). (2004) 
47
 
GUEYE, E.F. Village egg and fowl meat pr oduction in Africa. Worlds Poultry Science 
Journal, 54 (1998):73–86. 
GUEYE, E.F. Women and family poultry producti on in Africa. Development in Practice, 
10(2000):98–102. 
IFPRI (2000). www.cgiar.org/IFPRI. 
KABATANGE, M.A., KATULE, A.M. Rural poultry production systems in Tanzania. In: 
Sonaiya, E.B.(1990). Rural poultry in Africa. Conference Proceedings. Ile-Ife, Nigeria, 
p. 171–176. 
KHISA G., ONDWASY O.H. Curriculum for Farmers Field School on Local Chicken 
Production (egg to egg programme) FAO(2003). Kenya. 
KYVSGAARD, N., (1999). Personal communication. 
MATTHEWMAN, R.W., A Survey of Small Livest ock Production at the Village level in the 
Derived Savanna and Lowland forest Zones of South West Nigeria. University of 
Reading. Department of Agriculture and Horticulture Study No. 24. (1977). 
MINGA, U. M., KATULE, A. M., MAEDA, T., MUSASA, J. Potential and problems of the 
traditional chicken industry in Tanzania. Proceedings of th e 7th Tanzania veterinary 
scientific conference. Arusha 1989. 7: 207–215. 
MLODZI, I. MINGA, U. Economic aspects of  village poultry produ ction in Tanzania. 
Proceedings from the workshop "The Use of Research for Development" Kenya 2003. 
NETWORK FOR SMALLHOLDER POULTRY DEVELOPMENT (NSPD) MSc theses in 
Poultry Production and Health. Compiled by 8 MSc students from Bangladesh. 2000–
2002. Network for Smallholder Poultry Development. (2002) 330. 
NETWORK FOR SMALLHOLDER POULTRY DEVELOPMENT (NSPD) Rapport du 
deuxième Atelier Regional de Projets d’aviculture Villageoise En Afrique De L’Ouest. 
Stratégies Commerciales D’aviculture Villageoise. Du 24 Au 27 Septembre 2002 À 
Tenkodogo, Burkina Faso. (2003). 
NIELSEN, H. Review on the smallholder pou ltry model developed in  Benin. Network for 
Smallholder Poultry Development. (2003). 
PANDEY, V.S., Epidemiology and economics of village poultry production in Africa: 
Overview. In: Pandey, V. S. and Demey,  F. (1992). Village poultry production in 
Africa. Conference Proceedings. Rabat, Morocco, p. 124–128. 
PERMIN, A. Helminths and helminthosis of poultr y with special emphasis on Ascaridia galli 
in chickens. PhD-thesis. The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University. 
Denmark(1997). 
PERMIN, A., BISGAARD, M. A general review on some important diseases in free range 
chickens. Poultry as a tool in Poverty Erad ication and Promotion of Gender Equality. 
Proc.of a Workshop, March 22–26, Tune Landboskole, Denmark, 181–187 (1999). 
PERMIN, A., PEDERSEN, G. Problems related to poultry production at village level. 
Proceedings of the workshop on the possib ilities for Smallholder Poultry Projects in 
Eastern and Southern Africa. Morogoro, Tanzania, 22–25 May 2000. 65–69. 
RIISE, J.C., PERMIN, A., LARSEN, C.E.S,. IDI, A. Optimisizing Appropriate Technology 
Transfer To Small Producers. WPC, Istanbul Turkey, 8–12 June 2004 (WPC 
proceedings– 2004). 
SALEQUE, M.A., MUSTAFA, S. Landless Women and Poultry: The BRAC Model in 
Bangladesh. Integr. Farming in Human Development.(1996) Proc. of a Workshop, 25–
29.03, Tune Landboskole, Denmark, 
http://www.ihh.kvl.dk/htm/php/tune96/3Mustafa.htm 
SCHOU, T.W., Disease resistance of indigenous poultry. PhD-thesis (in prep) (2004). 
WILSON, R.T., TRAORE, A., KUIT, H.G., SLINGERLAND, M. Livestock production in 
central Mali: Reproduction, grow th and mortality of domes tic fowl under traditional 
management. Tropical Animal Health and Production, 19(1987):229–236. 
48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY REPORTS 

 
THE EFFECT OF VACCINATION AGAINST NEWCASTLE DISEASE AND 
FEED SUPPLEMENTATION ON PRODUCTION IN VILLAGE CHICKEN IN 
BAMENDA AREA OF CAMEROON 
 
F.N. EKUE, D.K. PONE, J.M. MAFENI A.N. NFI, J. NJOYA 
Institut de recherche agricole pour le développement (IRAD), 
Production d'animale et de la pêche, Yaounde, Cameroon 
Abstract 
A study was carried out in Ndop and Santa zones of the Bamenda area in the Republic of 
Cameroon on the effect of vaccination against Newcastle disease and feed supplementation on 
production in backyard poultry. The results of the study showed that there was an increase in egg 
production and weight gain in the vaccinated birds which received feed supplement as compared to the 
non-vaccinated and without feed supplements. The mortal ity pattern did not reflect the effect of feed 
supplementation suggesting that other factors may be responsible for mortality. An economic analysis 
of the impact of the two interventions on backyard poultry production was carried out using the partial 
farm budget analysis. It was evident from the results that feed supplementation was beneficial to rural 
poultry performance and that the inclusion of a vaccination programme against Newcastle disease 
made the intervention even more beneficial. 
INTRODUCTION. 
With the exception of urban areas of Nort hern and Southern Africa, most poultry 
production in Africa is undertaken through extensive system at village or family level. Almost 
every village household keeps domestic fowl between 5– 20 birds and it is estimated that 
village fowl makes up more than 80% of the total domestic fowl population in Africa 
estimated at 1068 million (Gueye, 1998). 
Poultry keeping in Cameroon is largely do minated by the traditional system, which 
handles about 19 millions chicken representing about 70% of the total flock population. This 
system is called backyard and remains heterogeneous in terms of breeds or strains, housing 
and management systems. Despite the potential inherent to this traditional system, many 
constraints hinder its evolve ment namely neglect by proprietors and policy makers, 
unimproved genetic materials, poor housing design, prevalence of Newcastle and Gumboro 
diseases and poor feeding (Nwosu, 1979, Ekue et al., 1999, Awan et al., 1994). Pandey, 1992; 
Aini, 1990; Bagust, 1994; Bagust 1994. 
This paper is based on data generated after field interventions were done in 2002 on 
vaccination against Newcastle diseases, de-w orming, feed supplementation, and on-the-job 
training of family poultry farmers on routin e improved management techniques. The paper 
also highlights the economic impact of fe ed supplementation and vaccination against 
Newcastle disease. 
51
 
METHODOLOGY 
Area of study 
The study was carried out in two zones (San ta and Ndop) located in the North West 
Province of Cameroon. The Santa zone is of high altitude (>1200 m above sea level (a.s.1) 
and the Ndop zone is of low altitude (<1200 a.s.l). 
Farmer selection 
Three villages were selected from each z one and four households from each village 
giving a total of 24 households or experimental  units. While villages were chosen at random, 
care was taken to ensure that each household kept  at least 10 traditional chicken of which at 
least 4 were adult hens. Moreover, in each v illage households were chosen to reflect the 
existing tribal settlements, eith er of the Fulani or the indi genous Grassfield settlers. Each 
group of settlers corresponded to specific  environments, ways of life and poultry 
production/management patterns. 
Interventions 
Vaccinations 
Intra-ocular vaccination against Newcastle disease using a locally available pack 
(HIPRAVIAR-BI) from Spain. A booster was adminis tered to all the birds one month later. 
Birds from all the house holds were also dewormed using piperazine citrate. 
Provision of feed supplement. 
The chicken under study were allowed to scav enge, but in addition to this, their food 
was supplemented with compounded feed made of maize, (90%) and bone meal (10%). Seven 
out of the ten farmers in each zone were pr ovided with feed, while the others served as 
control. A handful of feed was provided to ch icken every morning before they were allowed 
to scavenge assuming that each bird would get about 60 gm of feed supplement daily. 
Data collection and analysis 
Field data on egg production, body weight change and mortality were collected 
monthly during visits to farms implicated in the vaccination programme by researchers, 
research technicians and extensionists. The data collected were subjected to the process of 
data reduction to obtain organi sed information, which was stored in a spreadsheet program 
(excel 2002). Descriptive analysis was c onducted on the production data collected from 
individual household. 
Economic analysis of the vaccination prog ramme was conducted us ing farm partial 
budgeting procedures as outlined by Goodger et al. (2000). The farm budgeting procedures 
included the six steps outlined by Goodger et al. (2000) and summarized as follows: 
• establish a baseline data in order to calculate the additional income generated 
from the programme; 
• deduct the additional annual income as a difference between the average income 
while on the programme and the estimated income before the programme started; 
• estimate the program costs by listing cost values of each input; 
52
 
• calculate the profit by subtracting from the program costs those of additional 
income generated; 
• calculate the return on investment by dividing the additional income from the 
program by the program costs; 
• the criteria for a successful intervention is a dollar income >$1 or a return >$1. 
 
The economic data collection scheme was as follows: 
The baseline data was that of 1999 (Ekue et al., 1999). These data were obtained after 
two years of project life during which interventions were implemented sporadically. After the 
survey, additional interventions as stated a bove were implemented in  selected households. 
Monitoring took place from January to March 2003, during which time data were collected on 
farm productivity. The differences between thes e two values helped to build up the partial 
budgeting parameters. 
Data were kept on market prices of chicken products, flock size and variations due to 
mortality, sales, purchases, home consumption, gi fts or predators. The field vaccination cost 
was determined following procedures outlined by Alders et al. (2002). 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Results in Table I show the egg producti on and chicken mortality through a three-
month period (dry season) when farmers experienced shortage of feedstuff such as maize 
grains to provide their chicke n. Seven out of 10 farms were se rved with feed to supplement 
their feeding. The amounts of feed fed to  chicken were not quantified. Average egg 
production per household increased with feed supplementation in both zones (Santa zone: 23 
versus 15 eggs and Ndop zone: 8 versus 4 eggs for feed supplementation and non 
supplementation, respectively). 
The mortality pattern did not reflect the eff ect of feed supplementation. This suggests 
that other factors in addition to feed may be responsible for mortality. 
TABLE I.  EGG PRODUCTION OF CHICKEN SUBJECTED TO DIFFERENT FEED 
TREATMENTS.  
Feed 
treatment 
Location Total egg 
number 
Average 
egg number 
/clutch 
Maximum 
number /clutch
Minimum 
number 
Chicken 
mortality per 
household 
Santa 938 22.8 42 3 4.5 Feed 
supplement Ndop 924 8.1 49 3 3.8 
Santa 394 14.5 45 1 4.8 Non feed 
supplement Ndop 102 3.8 26 1 7.4 
 
Table II shows monthly weight gain as recorded  in various farms. The unsexed and 
the female average weight increased with f eed intervention in both Santa and Ndop zones. 
However, no explanation can be forwarded fo r the reverse situation observed for male 
chicken in Ndop zone. 
53
 
TABLE II.  MONTHLY WEIGHT GAIN OF CHICKEN SUBJECTED TO DIFFERENT FEED 
TREATMENTS.  
Location 
Santa and Ndop Santa Ndop 
Traits 
Feed Non feed Feed Non feed Feed Non feed 
Average weight 
gain (g) 
150 89 96 68 184 148 
Female average 
gain (g) 
124 39 55 39 158 140 
Male average 
gain (g) 
222 336 180 385 278 200 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE FIELD INTERVENTIONS 
The use of computed database provide d partial budgets for Ndop, Santa and both 
zones combined, respectively (Tables III and IV). 
TABLE III.  PARTIAL BUDGETING RESULTS FOR NDOP ZONE FOR THE PERIOD 
JANUARY– MARCH 2003. 
INCREASED INCOME (FCFA) INCREASED COSTS (FCFA) 
Additional income generated from 
the program 
Costs as a result of the program 
Before 
intervention 
18.257 Vaccination 469.7 Sales and other 
off take  
After intervention 18.862 
 
Other medical 
costs 
27.3 
Difference in income 605.7 Total costs 497.0 
Income minus costs (Profit margins 108.7 
Income-costs ratio 1.219 
TABLE IV.  PARTIAL BUDGETING RESULTS FOR SANTA ZONE FOR THE PERIOD, 
JANUARY– MARCH, 2003. 
INCREASED INCOME (FCFA) INCREASED COSTS (FCFA) 
Additional income generated from the program Costs as a result of the program 
Before 
intervention 
18336 Vaccination 515.19 Sales and other off take 
(Home consumption; gifts, 
etc.) After 
intervention 
25003 
 
Other medical costs 36.98 
Difference in income  6667 Total costs 552.17 
Income minus costs (Profit margins 6114.9 
Income-costs ratio 12.07 
CONCLUSION 
From this field study, it was evident that feed supplementation was beneficial to rural 
chicken performance and that the addition of va ccination program made the intervention even 
more beneficial in Ndop zone. For most of the households that implemented the interventions, 
the increase in the total number of chicken raised represented a significant improvement in 
diet, hygiene, clothing, medication, schooling a nd other family requirements. In fact, some 
54
 
farmers boasted of their improved social status because they could now easily afford one or 
two cocks for various ceremonies in the village and this was not the case in the past. Despite 
the significant improvement in village poultr y production as a result of vaccination against 
Newcastle disease on the one hand and feed supplementation on the other, there is still a 
major constraint on the production and availability of the New castle disease vaccine at the 
village level. It is important for the National Veterinary Laboratory (LANAVET), Garoua, to 
start the production of thermostable vaccines pa ckaged in small doses affordable to the poor 
farmers. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank the technicians of the animal health section of IRAD Mankon 
station including the extension agents of th e Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Animal 
Industries in the Ndop and Santa zones for their assistance in data collection. We also thank 
the traditional poultry farmers of these zones for their immense collaboration throughout the 
duration of the project Finally, our sincere th anks go to the International Atomic Energy 
Agency ( FAO/IAEA), Vienna, Austria, for providing funds for the project. 
REFERENCES 
ALDERS, R.F.D. ANJOS, B., BAGNOL, A., FUMO, B., MATA, M., YOUNG, Controlling 
Newcastle disease in village chicken: A training manual. ACIAR Monograph No. 86. 
2002 128pp. 
AINI, I., Indigenous chicken production in Sout h-east Asia, World’s Poultry Science J. 46 
(1990) 51–57. 
AWAN, M.A., OTTE, M.J., JAMES, A.D., The epidemiology of Newcastle disease in rural 
poultry: a review, Avian Pathology 23 (1994) 405–423. 
BAGUST, T.J., Improving health for poultry production in Asia: a developmental perspective, 
Avian Pathol 23 (1994) 295–304. 
EKUE, N.F., PONE, D.K., MAFENI, J. NFI, A.N., NJOYA, J., Increasing farm yard poultry 
production in Africa by improving vaccina tion strategies against Newcastle and 
Gumboro diseases, using Nuclear-based technologies: The case of Bamenda 
Cameroon. IAEA/FAO project. A baseline pos t intervention survey report. August, 
1999. 
GOODGER, W.J., FRANK G., EISELE D., BENNETT, T., 2000. Using partial budgets to 
assess if the interventions you designed/implemented make more $ than they cost 
University of Wisconsin, School of Vet. Med. 8pp. 
GUEYE, E.F., Village egg and fowl meat production in Africa, World’s Poultry Science 
Journal 54 (1998) 73–86. 
NWOSU, C.C. Characterisation of the local chicken of Nigeria and its potential for egg and 
meat production. Proceedings of the 1s t National seminar on poultry production. 
Ahmadou Bello University, Zaria. December 11– 13, 1979. 187– 210. 
PANDEY, V.S., Epidemiology and economics of village poultry production in Africa: 
Overview. Conference Proceedings, Village  poultry production in Africa, Rabat, 
Morocco Pandey, V.S. and Demey, F. (Eds) (1992) 124–128. 
55
 
CORRELATION BETWEEN NEWCASTLE DISEASE VACCINES AND 
PESTICIDES POLLUTION IN VILLAGE CHICKEN 
A.H. AZZAM*, E.E.K. AHMED** 
* Department of Avian Diseases  
** Department of Biochemistry  
 
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, Giza, Egypt 
Abstract  
The prevalence Newcastle disease in vaccinated chicken under the effect of pollution with 
pesticides was studied. Six hundred day-old- native chicks were distributed in two areas. The first area 
used pesticides in competing parasite infections in agriculture crops while the second area did not use 
any pesticides. The prevalence of Newcastle disease in free-range village chicken was calculated by 
retrospective data analysis, cross section studies and the combination of serological survey and virus 
isolation. The presence of the pesticides Diazinol, Malathion and Trichlorofon was analysed by Thin 
Layer Chromatography (TLC). Diazinon, Malathion and Trichlorofon were detected in the chick sera 
in the first area. The prevalence of Newcastle disease in the polluted areas is higher than non-polluted 
areas. The rate of Newcastle disease is directly proportional to the quality and the quantity of pesticide 
pollutants in the sera. Newcastle antibody titers are inversely proportional to the quality and the 
quantity of pesticide pollutants in the sera. Morbidities and mortalities of Newcastle disease were 
higher in challenged chicken their sera had higher pesticide pollutants. The average body weights were 
lower in chicken feed on ration contaminated with pesticide pollutants.  
INTRODUCTION 
The main feed of free-range chicken is harvest leftovers, grains, worms, kitchen 
residues vegetables, insects or/and household sc raps. These chicken face two main problems, 
one of them is nutritional deficiency and the other is pesticide pollution. These two problems 
might have an adverse effect on the immune system of the bird so it gets more susceptible to 
infectious diseases and with high economic losses as a result 
Newcastle disease virus constitutes a serious problem in most countries of the world. 
It is responsible for high mortalities am ong poultry population. Though several types of 
vaccines are produced against the New castle disease such as Hitchner B 1, Lasota and 
inactivated vaccines. Yet still Newcastle disease is widely spread and outbreaks appear even 
in vaccinated farms. Lentogenic vaccine strains are used widely at different ages. (Zaher et 
al., 1962; Ahmed and Sabban, 1965;  El-Sissi, 1966 and Ahmed et al ., 1967). The NDV 
immune response increases as the pathogenicity of live vaccine increases (Reeve et al., 1974). 
Lasota vaccines are recommended for the protect ion of chickens at different ages due 
to efficacy and safety. The antibody levels reached protect the vaccinated chicks against NDV 
infections. This protection depends on recurr ent infection and factors affecting the immune 
systems of the susceptible birds. Environmen tal factors, including  pollution have been 
implicated in increase diseases infections am ong animals and birds. Previous studies of 
laboratory animals and wildlife species have de monstrated the immuno-toxicity of pesticides 
(Grasman and Fox, 2001). Although the relatio n between pesticide under natural conditions 
and the immune response during vaccination campaigns has not been studied. 
The use of Diazinon, Malathion and Trichlor ofon on golf courses and sod farms has 
been prohibited because of their high acute risk to birds Gilman et al . (1991). However 
56
 
Diazinon, Malathion and Meterifonate are commonly used in Egypt in agriculture or for 
veterinary purposes and can be traced in chicken. 
The aim of our paper is to study the prev alence of Newcastle disease in vaccinated 
chicken under the effect of pollution with pesticides  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Study area 
Sharkia and Giza districts were two ecological zones selected for this field study. The 
first area is situated east Cairo. This area is a new reclaimed area and characterized by 
producing vegetables and fruits as well as high us e of pesticide to contro l the plant parasites. 
The 2nd area is situated south of Cairo and did not use any pesticides for agricultural purposes. 
Chicken 
Source of chicken: Six hundreds day-old native chicks (Balady) were bought from the 
EL-Azab project in the province of Fayoum. 
The number of chicken and their distribution is summarized in Table I. 
Shelter and management: The chicks were allowed to scavenge during the daytime 
and were sheltered at night (Traditional type).  
Vaccination 
All chicken were vaccinated against NDV and IBDV. 
IBDV vaccine: Live  intermediate commercial Gumboro (Bursimune, Biomune 
vaccines) vaccine was given by eye drop at the age of one–day. 
NDV vaccine: Chicken were vaccinated, via eye drop route, with  Hitchner B1 strain 
(Intervet vaccines Co.) at the age of 7 days and with La Sota strain (Respimune, Biomune 
vaccines co.) via oral route, at the age of 19, 30 and 60-day. 
IBDV and NDV vaccines were given according to the manufacture recommended 
doses and procedures. 
Feed 
The main feed consisted of household scraps, farm by-products and the chicken had to 
scavenge around for the remaining part of their nutritional requirements. 
Source of water: The ground water without prior trea tment was the main source in all 
farms. 
 
 
57
 
Blood samples 
Five blood samples were collected from all houses on day 1 followed by week-old, 1, 
2, 3, 4, 8 and 12 weeks. The sera were separa ted and kept for NDV serology tests and 
pesticide residue analysis at –20˚C. 
Challenge study 
At the end of the observation period (when th e chicken were12-weeks old), ten birds were 
bought from each group and challenged with a 10 6 EID50/ml of the field VNDV strain by 
intramuscular route. Morbidity and mortality rates during this study were recorded. These 
were done at the experimental section at the Animal Health Research Institute. 
Haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test 
The HI tests against NDV using 4 heamagglutinating units were done by the Beta 
procedure. The HI titers were determined in all chickens, and the geometric mean titer (GMT) 
of each group was calculated. 
Pesticide residue analysis 
Serum samples were examined qualitatively for presence of the three pesticides 
(Diazinon, Malathion and Trichl orfon) using Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) with 
methanol as solvent and heptan : dimethylforma mide (90 : 10) as eluent and then detected by 
Rf value in consideration as mentioned by Fr ied and Sherma (1996). Positive samples were 
quantitatively examined according to Hernandez et al. (2002) and Clarke (1984). 
Post-mortem lesions and NDV isolation 
At the Animal Health Research Institute (AHRI) all sick and dead birds were brought 
for clinical, post-mortem examinations and NDV isolation. 
Observation period 
All farms were observed from one-day-old until 84-day-old. At the end of the 
experiment all chicken were weighted and the average body weight was calculated. 
Statistical analysis 
• Morbidities and mortalities either during observation period or due to challenge 
with NDV. 
• NDV antibody titers. 
• Qualitative and quantitative of Diazinon, Ma lathion and Trichlorfon residues in 
sera. 
• Average body weight. 
The data was subjected to analysis of  variance (ANOVA) and means compared for 
significance using Least Significant Difference as well as Duncan Multiple Range Test for 
comparative of means at P < 0.05 on a comput er program. Economical  benefit value was 
calculated using χ2 square test at P < 0.05 (SPSS 11, 2002). 
58
 
RESULTS 
In spite of various vaccina tion programs against NDV, in fection continued to be a 
major problem in flocks of native breed in Eg ypt. Usually the native flocks are vaccinated 
several times with live NDV vaccines during the growing period and production period but 
the results are not satisfactory. 
In this study the main concern was directed to evaluate the relation between Pesticides 
and commercially NDV vaccines in village chickens and the results were as follow: 
Morbidities and mortalities 
At each house natural outbreaks of NDV was verified by isolation of NDV from birds 
that succumbed to the disease within the trail time (Table II). The recorded morbidities were 
16%, 15%, 12%, 10%, 7% and 5% in houses 1, 3, 5, 2, 4 and 6 respectively while the 
mortalities were 14%, 12%, 11%, 6%, 6% and 4%. 
NDV signs 
Signs of NDV were sudden death, facial edema sever whitish, greenish or darkish 
diarrhea, drooping wings, reluctant to move , lack of appetite, difficulties in breathing, 
coughing, sneezing, gasping and sometimes leg paralysis and nervous signs. 
Post-mortem lesions 
NDV lesions were congested visceral organs, petecheal ecchymotic haemorrhage on 
intestinal and coloacal mucosa, haemorrhage on tips of proventricullus villi and cecal tonsils, 
pneumonic lungs, severe tracheitis and enteritis. 
The diagnosis of NDV was confirmed by virus isolation from sick and dead birds with 
subsequent characterization according to Office international Des Epizooties (OIE) Manual of 
Standards for Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines (1992).
 
Results of challenge 
In the challenged birds (Table III), the recorded morbidities were 60%, 50%, 50%, 
30%, 30% and 20% in houses 1, 3, 5, 2, 4 and 6 while the mortality were 50%, 50%, 40%, 
20%, 10% and 10% respectively. 
NDV antibody titers 
Table IV reveals that, there was little evid ence of NDV antibody in the chicken before 
the trails. The vaccinated chicks gave immunity against NDV, which is better in houses 6 and 
4 then 2, 5, 3 and 1 respectively. 
Detection of pesticide residues 
Quantities of pesticide residues in different positive serum samples (ppm) showed the 
presence of Diazinon, Malathion and Trichlorfon in serum with significant concern (P < 0.05) 
using analysis of variance and house 5 was si gnificantly the highest in Diazinon residues; 
house 1 was the highest in Malathion residues while house 3 was the highest in Trichlorfon 
residues in serum at P < 0.05 using LSD (Tables, 5 and 6). 
59
 
Correlation between pesticide and NDV antibody titer 
From Tables IV, V and VI it is clear that there are a detectable significant limit of 
pesticide residues and significan t decline in NDV antibody titers in tested sera in groups 1, 3 
and 5 which means that there are a signifi cant correlation between pesticide residues and 
NDV titer at P <0.05 using LSD. 
TABLE I. CHICKEN NUMBERS AND DISTRIBUTION. 
House Number * Pesticide 
uses 
Source Governorate 
1 100 + Sharkia 
2 100 + Sharkia 
3 100 + Sharkia 
4 100 + Sharkia 
5 100 + 
Native 
commercial 
breed 
Sharkia 
6 100 –  Giza 
*All chicks in all houses were vaccinated as follow: 
1-day-old IBDV by eye route. 
7-day-old HB1 by eye route. 
30-day-old LaSota by eye route. 
60-day-old LaSota by eye route 
TABLE II. MORBIDITY, MORTALITY AND BODY WEIGHT IN OBSERVED HOUSEHOLDS. 
 
Morbidity Mortality Average body 
weight/Grams 
House 
Number % Number %  
1 16 16 14 1 675 
2 10 10 6 2 875 
3 15 15 12 3 775 
4 7 7 6 4 875 
5 12 12 11 5 805 
6 5 5 4 6 1000 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage
12345
Houses
Morbidity
Mortality
Body weight
 
FIG. 1. Morbidity, mortality and body weights in households due to natural NDV 
 
60
 
TABLE III. MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY IN NDV-CHALLENGED BIRDS. 
 Morbidity Mortality 
House Number % Number % 
1 6 60 5 50 
2 3 30 2 20 
3 5 50 5 50 
4 3 30 1 10 
5 5 50 4 40 
6 2 20 1 10 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage
123456
House
Morbidity
Mortality
 
FIG. 2. Shows morbidity and mortality in NDV-challenged birds 
TABLE IV. NDV GEOMETRIC MEAN TITER BY HI. 
House 1 day 1st week 2 nd week 3 rd week 4 th week 8 th week 12 th week 
1 5 4 6 6 5 6 5.5 
2 5 4 6 7 6 7 7 
3 5 4 6 6 5 6 6 
4 5 4 6 7 6 7 7 
5 5 4 6 6.5 5.5 6.5 6.5 
6 5 4 6 8 6 7 7 
 
 
61
 
0
2
4
6
8
1 day2 weeks
4 w
eeks
12 weeks
Age
NDV tite
House 6
House 5
House 4
House 3
House 2
House 1
 
FIG. 3. NDV Geometric Mean Titer by HI 
 
TABLE V.  POS. PESTICIDE RESIDUES SAMPLES, NUMBER AND PERCENT IN SERUM 
AND CORRELATION WITH NDV USING THE SPEARMAN METHOD. 
 
1st week 2 nd week 3 rd week 4 th week 8 th week 12 th week Cor-
relation 
Hou No % No % No. % No % No % No %  
1 4 1.33 3 1.00 5 1.67 4 1.33 2 0.67 1 0.33 0.424** 
2 0 0.00 5 1.67 0 0.00 3 1.00 3 1.00 5 1.67 0.198 
3 1 0.33 4 1.33 1 0.33 0 0.00 4 1.33 0 0.00 0.303* 
4 2 0.67 4 1.33 1 0.33 1 0.33 2 0.67 3 1.00 0.031 
5 0 0.00 2 0.67 5 1.67 1 0.33 3 1.00 0 0.00 0.284* 
6 -ve 0 -ve 0 -ve 0 -ve 0 -ve 0 -ve 0 0 
* Significant at P < 0.05 using Spearman correlation 
** Significant at P < 0.01 using Spearman correlation 
TABLE VI . THE QUANTITY OF PESTICIDE RESIDUES IN DIFFERENT POSITIVE SERUM 
SAMPLES (PPM). 
House Diazinon Malathion Trichlorfon 
1 0.65 ± 0.12 1.31 ± 0.24 0.08 ± 0.03 
2 0.98 ± 0.12 0.61 ± 0.12 0.07 ± 0.009 
3 1.15 ± 0.15 0.82 ± 0.26 0.11 ± 0.06 
4 1.35 ± 0.13 0.91 ± 0.31 0.03 ± 0.04 
5 1.41 ± 0.29 1.11 ± 0.35 0.07 ± 0.01 
F-calculated 6.542# 11.324# 9.658# 
LSD 0.257 0.298 0.019 
* Significantly different using ANOVA test at P < 0.05 LSD = Least Significant Difference 
 
62
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
ppm
12345
House
Diazinon
Malathion
Trichlorfon
 
FIG. 4.Ppesticide residues in different positive serum samples (ppm). 
 
TABLE VII. ECONOMICAL ANALYSIS OF RESULTED DATA BY L.E. (EGYPTIAN POUND). 
House No. of 
chicken 
Cost Vic. 
cost 
Total 
cost 
No. 
Live 
*Average 
body 
Weight 
**Total 
body 
Weight 
Sales Benefit Benefit/
Unit 
1 100 80 2.5 82.5 86 0.675 58.05 464.4 381.9 5.629 
2 100 80 2.5 82.5 94 0.875 82.25 658 575.5 7.975 
3 100 80 2.5 82.5 88 0.775 68.2 545.6 463.1 6.613 
4 100 80 2.5 82.5 94 0.875 82.25 658 575.5 7.975 
5 100 80 2.5 82.5 89 0.805 71.645 573.16 490.66 6.947 
6 100 80 2.5 82.5 96 1 96 768 685.5 9.309 
Chi-Square 18.93 *** 
* Average body Weight/grams square test. 
** Total body Weight/kg  
*** Significant at P < 0.05 using Chi 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
Beneifit Unit
123456
House
 
FIG. 5. Economic benefit values of different houses. 
 
63
 
DISCUSSION 
The relation between vaccination response and pesticide pollution under natural 
condition has not been studied. Newcastle diseas e is considered one of the most important 
disease among different age gr oups of free-ranging rural chicken which causes severe 
economic losses due to an increase number of morbidities, mortalities and drop in egg 
production in laying chicken. The highest be nefit degree of controlling morbidities and 
mortalities depends on suitable me dia and factors lead to the success of vaccination against 
the disease.  
The present work revealed that the Newcastle disease was most prevalent in areas with 
a high pesticide pollution. In this respect D’Mello (2002) reported that environmental factors, 
including pollution have resulted in an increase of infections among animals and birds.  
The NDV symptoms appeared suddenly in peracute or acute forms and the post-
mortem lesions were more pronounced and more acute when compared to birds not having 
completely polluted feed, which is in agreement  with Alexander  (1997). Serology of the 
tested sera using the HI test revealed that Newcastle antibody titers were lower in highly 
pesticide polluted farms. This  correlates with results obtai ned by Grasman and Fox (2001) 
who demonstrated the immunotoxicity and imm unosupression of pestic ides in laboratory 
animals and wildlife species. 
The correlation between NDV antibody levels and the quantity of pesticides pollution 
in the sera of tested chicke n was calculated by using the Sp earman correlation method. This 
proved a positive correlation between studied pa rameters in household number 1 at P < 0.05; 
2 and in household number 3 at P < 0.01.Our findi ng agreed with those obtained by Bishop et 
al. (1998) who observed drastic effect of pesticide on the immune system and its development 
in 16-day-old Tree Swallow (Tachycineta bicolor) birds. Grasman et al. (2000) recorded the 
positive correlation between pesticide exposure and immune status of 3-week-old herring 
gulls (
Larus argentatus) from six sites on Lakes Superior an d observed a significant decrease 
in immuno-globulins of the studied birds. Also, Grasman and Fox (2001) showed an 
association between organ chlo rines and suppressed T cell f unction and enhanced antibody 
production in young Caspian tern s, they added that there was a significant drop in total 
antibody titers following immunization with sheep red blood cells. The titers were positively 
correlated with plasma PCBs and DDE.  
CONCLUSION 
The results obtained in the 6 villages are extremely challenging due to: 
• Lack of knowledge about nutrient polluta nts, which is considered a serious 
problem for householders and a limiting factors for production. 
• In order to control of the economic lo sses due to infectious diseases, its 
recommended to use suitable vaccine as well as a feed free of pesticide pollution .  
• Above all the farmers were satisfied with  the results and motivated to invest 
more inputs to improve the poultry production system. 
At the end, householders are extremely in terested in seeing the possibility of 
controlling other diseases under village conditi ons and are looking forward to extent the 
project. 
64
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank family poultry productions and the veterinary research 
staff at the Animal Health Research Institute In Dokki-Giza, Egypt for their keen cooperation. 
We sincerely thank Dr. A.A. Abuzeed, the tech nical manager of Biomune vaccines co. in the 
middle east for technical support and providing facilities during this work. My great deep 
thanks to Dr. Anders Permin, professor of Parasitology, Institute for Veterinary Microbiology, 
Denmark for his kind instructions and gener ous cooperation during writing this work. Our 
deep appreciation goes to Animal Production a nd Health Section of the Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division for their technical and financial support during this work.  
This work was conducted under Joint FAO/ IAEA Division Research Contract, No. 
Egy.10181. 
REFERENCES 
AHMED, A., REDA, I., ABBASI, K., EL-SISI, M., (1967) Studies on the immune response 
to vaccination against Newcastle disease in U.A.R. J., Vet. Sci., 4: 115–118. 
AHMED, A., SABBAN, M. (1965) Studies on Newcastle disease vaccines in Egypt. 
Preparation and application of  desiccated whole embryo vaccine, J. Arab. Vet. Med. 
Ass., 25: 165–170. 
ALEXANDER, D.J. Newcastle disease and othe r Avian Paramyxoviridea infections, In 
Diseases of poultry. 10th edition, 721–738. Edited by B.W. Calnek et al., Ames, Iowa 
State University Press. (1997) 
BISHOP, C.A. BOERMANS, H.J., NG, P., CAMPBELL, G.D., STRUGER, J., (1998) Health 
of tree swallows ( Tachycineta bicolor) nesting in pesticide-sprayed apple orchards in 
Ontario, Canada. I. Immunological para meters, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, 55 (8): 
531–559. 
CLARKE, E.G.C. Isolation and Identification of Drugs, Vol. II, 294–295, The Pharmaceutical 
Press, London. (1984) 
D`Mello, J.P.F. Contaminants and toxins in animal feeds, Scottish Executive Rural Affairs 
Department (Project 627012). (2002)  http://www.fao.org/agriba/publication  
EL-SISI, M.A. The role of different existing vaccine in the control prevention of Newcastle 
disease, M.D. Vet. Thesis, Faculty of Vet. Med., Cairo University. (1966) 
FRIED, B., SHERMA, J. Practical Thin Layer Chromatography a Multisciplinary Approach, 
CRC Press, Inc., Florida, USA, 252–255. (1996) 
GRASMAN, K.A. ARMSTRONG, M., HAMMERSLEY, D.L., SCANLON, P.F., FOX, G.A., 
Geographic variation in blood plasma protei n concentrations of young herring gulls 
(Larus argentatus) and Caspian terns ( Sterna caspia) from the Great Lakes and Lake 
Winnipeg. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Toxicol. Pharmacol.; 125(3) (2000): 365–375. 
GRASMAN, K.A., FOX, G.A. Associati ons between altered immune function and 
organochlorine contamination in young Caspian terns ( Sterna caspia ) from Lake 
Huron, 1997–1999, Ecotoxicology, 10 (2) (2001): 101–114. 
GILMAN, A.G., RALL, T.W., NIES, A.S., TAYLOR, P.(Eds) Goodman and Gilman's: The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 8 th Ed., Pergamon Press, Member of Maxwell 
MacMillan Pergamon Publishing Corporati on New York, Oxford, Beijing, Frankfurt, 
Sydney, Toronto. (1991) 
HERNANDEZ, T.M.E., EGEA, G.F.J., CSTRO, C.M.L., MORENO, F.M., MARTINEZ, 
V.J.L. Residues of methami dofos, malathion and methiocar b in greenhouse crops. J. 
Agric. Food Chem., 27 (5) (2002): 1172–1177. 
OIE Manual of Standards For Diagnostic Tests a nd Vaccines: Infectious Bursal Disease. pp. 
616–627. (1992) 
65
 
REEVE, P., ALEXANDER, D.J., ALLAN, W.H., (1974) Derivation of an isolate of low 
virulence from the Essex 70 strain of Newcastle disease virus, Vet. Rec. 94: 38–41. 
SPSS 11. SPSS for windows Release 10.0.1. 27 Oct. 2002, Standard Version, Copyright SPSS 
Inc. 2001–2002, All Rights Reserved, Copyright ® SPSS Inc. 
ZAHER, A., EISSA, Y.M., NAFIE, E. Imm unization of broiler chicken with B 1 and F-strains 
of Newcastle disease vaccine, Proc. 3rd Ann. Vet. Cong. (1962). 
66
 
PREVALENCE OF GUMBORO DISEASE IN VACCINATED AND NON-
VACCINATED VILLAGE CHICKENS IN EGYPT 
A.H. AZZAM, H.M.Z. YOUSEIF, E.E.K. AHMED 
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki–Giza, Egypt  
 
Abstract 
In order to investigate the incidence of Gumboro disease virus (IBDV) in village poultry in 
Egypt, 3000 one-day-old Balady chicks were distributed to 60 householders keeping free- ranging 
chicken (traditional) with an average of 50 chicks/ household. These were put under observed from 
one-day-old until seventy days of age and visited once a week. 
On 30 of these household farms the one-day-old chicken were vaccinated before delivery with 
an intermediate IBDV strain while the chicken on the other 30 farms were not vaccinated. Fifteen of 
each vaccinated and unvaccinated householder farms had other avian species while the other fifteen of 
each vaccinated and unvaccinated householders had not. The clinical symptoms, post-mortem and 
serological results using the Agar Gel Immuno-diffusion test (AGID) revealed that Gumboro disease 
is one of the most important diseases in rural chicken. Mortality rates were very high (5–32%) and 
decreasing body weights due to IBDV infection were significant, especially in chicken reared with 
other avian species. 
Results from the survey showed the significant efficacy of IBDV classical vaccine in one-day-
old chicken. It showed a decrease in mortality and an increase in body weight gain on vaccinated 
farms independent whether they were kept with other avian species. 
Vaccination programs to control Gumboro disease would be an advantage in traditional 
poultry farms.  
INTRODUCTION 
Rural poultry production is an important agricultural activity in almost all developing 
communities in Africa and elsewhere, providing animal protein in the form of meat and eggs 
as well as being a reliable source of petty cas h. Gumboro usually occurs in young chicken 
while turkeys and ducks may be infected (Luke rt and Saif, 1997). The acute form causes high 
morbidity and high mortality discouraging house holders from paying proper attention to the 
husbandry and welfare of this attention. More over chicken tr aders also suffer from huge 
financial losses due to IBDV mortality in chic ken, particularly those who buy young aged 
chicken and rear them for several weeks afte r purchase. This can cause secondary problems 
due to the effect of the virus on the bursa fabricii. It causes lymphoid depletion of the bursa. If 
this happen in the first week of life signific ant depression of the humeral antibody response 
may result. 
Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) wa s first described by Cosgrove (1962) in 
USA, and was recorded in Egypt by El-Sergany et al., (1974). The perpetuation of IBD in 
commercial flocks is attributed to the highly resistant nature of the virus and the emergence of 
pathogenic and antigenic variants (Lukert and Saif, 1997). This acute IBD also spread to 
Egypt (El-Batrawy, 1990). Although commercial chickens and breeding flocks are routinely 
vaccinated with live and inactivated classic v accines, acute outbreaks are still reported in 
Egypt. It is apparent that available classic va ccine and vaccination strategies need to be re-
evaluated especially against recently emerged IBDV.  
67
 
The objective of this study was to observe the current situation of Gumboro disease 
(IBDV) in village chickens and to study the benefit of using classic intermediate IBDV 
commercial vaccine at one-day-old in a small unit of village chickens. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Location and description of the study area 
Sixty households were randomly select ed and put under our observation. These 
households were located in Giza, Sharkia, Dakahlia, and Kalubiah provinces, which are 
located in South, East, North and Middle Egyp t respectively (Table I). On 30 of these 
householder farms the day-old chickens were vacc inated with IBD intermediate strain by our 
team before delivery. Fifteen of each vacci nated and non-vaccinated householder farms had 
other avian species of birds (Ducks, Geese, Turkeys, Pidgins, mixed age and/ or older 
chickens) while the other fifteen of each vaccinated and non-vaccinated householders only 
had the delivered chicken. 
TABLE I. DISTRIBUTION OF RURAL FARMS SURVEYED IN PROVINCES. 
Number of farms  Province 
 Unvaccinated Vaccinated at 1-day-old 
 
 
Had  
other 
avian 
species 
Flock 
size 
Had no 
other 
avian 
species 
Flock 
size 
 
Had other 
avian 
Species 
Flock 
size 
Had no 
other 
avian 
species 
Flock 
size 
 
Giza 
 
Dakahlia 
 
Kalubia 
 
Sharkia 
4 
 
4 
 
4 
 
3 
223 
 
193 
 
146 
 
150 
4 
 
4 
 
4 
 
3 
198 
 
165 
 
134 
 
128 
4 
 
4 
 
4 
 
3 
246 
 
252 
 
173 
 
164 
4 
 
4 
 
4 
 
3 
229 
 
238 
 
162 
 
154 
Total 15 712 15 625 15 835 15 783 
NB. Forty-five chicks died during transportation. 
 
Number and source of chicks: Three thousands  one-day-old Balady chicks were bought 
from EL-Azab project, Fayoum province and divided as shown in Table I. 
Shelter and management:  Chicks were allowed to scavenge during the day time and 
sheltered at night (traditional type) and had no regular health control programmes.  
Ration: The main food was little bit of household scraps, farm by products and the scavenged 
feed  
Source of water: Ground water without prior treatment was the mainly source in all farms. 
IBDV vaccine:  Live  intermediate commercial Gumboro (Bursimune, Biomune vaccines) 
vaccine was given by eye drop at day one in a recommended dose.  
Observation period: All farms were put under our obs ervation from one-day-old until 
seventy day of age. These farms were visited once a week. 
 
68
 
Sample collection and handling 
• Blood samples from morbid chicken were collected from the wing vein with 3ml 
syringes and put in a cool box. Serum wa s separated from the blood and kept at –20°C 
until examination . 
• Fresh dead chicken were collected for post-mortem examination. 
• Bursa of Fabricius was collected from dead birds. 
• All these were transported to the Animal Health Research institute Laboratory in a cool 
box for further examination. 
IBDV antigen. The IBDV (FB99, type 1) was is olated from a local outbreak in Fayoum 
province by Hassan, et al. (2002) and used for preparation of specific antisera and antigens 
according to Office International des Epizooties (OIE) Manual of Standards for Diagnostic 
Tests and Vaccines (1992). 
 
IBD was suspected on the basis: 
• Clinical signs specific to IBDV Disease. 
• Number of morbidity specific to IBDV Disease. 
• Number of mortality specific to IBDV Disease. 
• Post-mortem lesions specific to IBDV Disease. 
IBD confirmation was done by: 
Serological tests: Agar ge l immuno-diffusion test (AGID)  is the most useful serological tests 
for detection of specific antibodies in serum and/or for detecting virus antigen in bursal 
tissues. Ouchterlony double immuno-diffusion test for detection of IBDV in bursal 
homogenates and IBDV antibody in the tested se ra were conducted as described by the OIE 
Manual of Standards for Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines (1992). 
Data collected 
• Morbidity and mortality numbers were gathered from poultry owners. 
• Registration of the clinical signs and post-mortem lesions.  
• Detection of IBDV antibody in the collected sera.  
• Detection of IBDV antigen from the collected bursae. 
• Average body weight at the end of the observation. 
• The price of the one-day-old chicks. 
• The cost of the vaccine dose per chick. 
• The sale price of one kg chicks.  
Statistical analysis 
The data was subjected to analysis of va riance (ANOVA) and means compared for 
significance using Least Significant Difference as well as Duncan Multiple Range Test for 
comparison of means at P < 0.05 on a computer  program. Economical benefit value was 
calculated using χ2 square test at P < 0.05 (SPSS 11, 2002). 
69
 
RESULTS 
Clinical signs and Post-mortem lesions 
 In the morbid chicks typical IBD mortality patterns (sharp death curve and rapid 
recovery) were noticed. Clinical signs were  whitish diarrhoea, anorexia, dehydration, 
depression, trembling, prostration and death. On post-mortem examination, characteristic IBD 
lesions were noticed including dehydration, mu scular haemorrhages, enlarged hemorrhagic 
bursa, urates in ureters and congested kidney.  
The relative morbidity of different farms is listed in Table II. 
The main results obtained were: 
• The age of susceptibility in Balady chicken to Gumboro disease is ranged from 21–45-
day-old.  
• The relative IBDV mortality was higher in chicken reared with other avian species than 
those reared with other avian species.  
• The prevalence of Gumboro disease was higher in chicken reared with other avian. 
• The body weight gain was less in chicken reared with other avian species than those not 
reared with other avian species. 
• The using of intermediate IBDV commercial vaccine at day-old gave satisfactory 
results. 
• It is better to rear young aged chicks separately.  
TABLE II.  INCIDENCE OF GUMBORO IN VACCINATED AND NONE-VACCINATED 
HOUSEHOLDER CHICKEN IN EGYPT. 
 
 
Morbidities
due to 
IBDV 
infection 
Mortalities 
due to 
IBDV 
infection 
IBDV 
Antigen 
detection/ 
dead birds 
IBDV 
Antibody 
detection 
/morbid birds 
Type of 
farm 
Treatment 
 
No. o
f 
farm 
Total 
No. 
of 
birds
No. % No. % No. % ΁No. % 
Unvaccinated 15 712 270 38% 227 32% 119 32% 270 
 
100% 
Had other 
Avian 
species Vaccinated 15 835 134 16% 75 9% 21 9% 134 100% 
Unvaccinated 15 625 200 
 
32% 
 
150 24% 62 
 
24% 200 100% Hadn’t 
other avian 
species Vaccinated 15 783 102 13% 39 5% 9 5% 102 100% 
70
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage
1234
Houses
Morbidity
Mortality
Body weight
 
FIG. 1. Incidence of Gumboro in vaccinated and non-vaccinated householder chicken in Egypt. 
DISCUSSION 
The evolution of IBDV during the last two decades has caused heavy economic losses 
for the poultry industry worldwide. In Egypt, little information is available about the 
biological characteristics of prevailing IBDV in rural chicken. This study showed that acute 
IBDV must be considered as a major health hazard that constrains family poultry production 
with morbidities from 13 to 38% and mortalities from 5 to 32%. 
The results proved that the prevalence of Gumboro disease is higher in chicken reared 
with other avian species than those that not been  kept with other avian species either on farms 
with vaccination or no vaccination against IBDV vaccine. This could be explained in part by 
the role of other avian species as carriers to transmit the IBDV to the chicken. Giambrone 
et 
al. (1978) reported that IBDV infection in turk eys were subclinicaly producing microscopic 
lesions in the bursa only. 
Bumstead et al. (1998) mentioned that variations in breed susceptibility have been 
documented for many poultry diseases. Okoye,  and Aba-duluga (1998) reported that local 
Nigerian chicken were more susceptible to IBD than exotic chicken. 
The source of IBDV infection in the observed flocks could not be identified. This may 
be due to the presence of other avian species as well as a lot of mosquitoes and rats. The latter 
were higher in numbers than reared chicke n. Howie and Thosen (1981) isolated IBDV from 
mosquitoes (Aedes vexan) that were trapped in an area where chicken were being raised. 
Okoye and Uche (1986) detected IBDV antibodi es from blood samples of rats which found 
dead in four poultry farms that had histories of IBDV infection.  
The sharp death curve, rapid recovery, the clinical signs and the post-mortem lesions 
correspond with observation in IBDV infections of  Leukert and Saif, (1997). They reported 
that whitish diarrhoea, anorexia , dehydration, depression, tremb ling, prostration and death, 
muscular haemorrhage, darkened  discoloration of pectoral mu scles, enlarged hemorrhagic 
cloacal bursa, urates in ureters and congested kidneys are characteristics for IBDV. 
71
 
The relative mortality in different farms in our investigation were 32% in 
unvaccinated farms which other avian species, 9% in vaccinated farms with other avian 
species, 24% in unvaccinated with no other avian species and 5% in vaccinated farms with no 
other avian species. 
Generally the mortality was high in all the farms compared to commercial farms 
which not exceeds 1% under ideal conditions. Mo reover the relative mortality in the farms 
with other avian species was higher than those farms without other avian species and this may 
be due to the recurrent IBDV infection of the chicken from other avian carrier species which 
were reared with them. This situation is simila r to what have been reported by Aini (2002) 
who stated that mortality in chicken is very high in developing countries where family poultry 
is a source of income to the rural population. Faouzy 
et al., 2002 found that NDV and IBDV 
diseases caused high mortality reaching 70% in village chicken in Morocco. Allan et al 
(1972) and Faraghter et al (1974) reported immunosuppressive effects of IBDV infections and 
birds are more susceptible to infectious diseases than other non-infected birds.  
On the other hand, the present study showed  the positive effect of using commercial 
IBDV vaccine at one-day-old chicken. The mortality in the unvaccinated breeds was higher 
than in the vaccinated breeds. This is in agreement with Hassan et al. (2002 and 2003) who 
found that the response of vaccinated and non-va ccinated native Egyptian breeds to infection 
with very virulent infectious bursal disease vi rus (vvIBDV) were not more than 3% and not 
less than 10% respectively. The diff erence between our results and Hassan et al., 2002 and 
2003 may be due to that they did their experiments on pure breeds, under laboratory 
conditions and chicken feed on suitable balanced ration.  
Our results showed that the levels of IBDV antibody in the morbid chicken were not 
paralleled by the recorded IBDV mortality rates in the same flocks. This may be due to the 
fact that mortality occurs after infection as determined by the humeral immune response as 
reported by Hassan 
et al, 2002.  
The significance of the decrease in body weight may be due to poor quality of food, 
poor shelters and the presence of other avia n breeds playing a great role in transmitting 
infectious diseases.  
TABLE III. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS. 
Treatment No. of 
chicken 
Price 
cost 
Vacc. 
Cost 
Total 
cost 
No. 
Live*
Average 
B. 
Weight 
Total B. 
Weight 
Sales Benefit Benefit/
Unit 
Unvac. + 
Av. 
712 569.6 0 569.6 442 0.468 206.9 1860 1290 4.3 
Vac.  + 
Av. 
835 668 20.8 688.8 701 0.514 360.3 3243 2554 6.7 
Unvac. 625 500 0 500.0 425 0.548 232.9 2096 1569.i 5.4 
Vac. 783 626.4 19.5 645.9 681 0.586 399.1 3591 2945 7.5 
*After deducing the morbid chicken.  
Unvac. = Unvaccinated, Vac. = Vaccinated, Av. = Avian, B.= Body, Chick price = 0.8 LE, Price of 1 kg.= 9LE, 
Vaccine coast/chick= 0.025 
 
72
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Non Vaccinated Vaccinated Non Vaccinated Vaccinated
Had other avian species Hadn't other avian species
 
FIG. 2. Comparison of benefit/unit gain from vacc inated and unvaccinated if had or had not other 
avian species in household. 
CONCLUSION 
IBDV vaccine was an important key to return investment for Family Poultry 
production in Egypt by making a vital contri bution to the improvement of household farm, 
food security and poverty alleviation. 
Rearing of young chicken separately form ot her avian species is beneficial in family 
poultry production.  
Control of IBDV in village chicken farm s could be useful in preventing IBDV 
infection in commercial chicken.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank family poultry productions and the veterinary research 
staff at Animal Health Research Institute In  Dokki-Giza , Egypt for their cooperation. We 
sincerely thank Dr. A.A. Abuzeed, the technical manager of Biomune vaccines Co. in the 
Middle East for technical support and providing  facilities during this work. My great deep 
thanks to Dr. Anders Permin, professor of Para sitology, Institute for veterinary microbiology, 
Denmark for his kind instructions and gener ous cooperation during writing this work. Our 
deep appreciation goes to Animal Production a nd Health Section of the Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division for their technical and financial suppor t during this work. This work was conducted 
under FAO/IAEA Research Contract No. Egy.10181.  
 
REFERENCES 
AINI, I., (1999): Diseases in rural family chicke n in South-East Asia. In the scope and effect 
of family poultry research and development\. Lead paper 2 in the 1 st INFPD/FAO 
electronic conference on family poultry  
ALLAN, W.H., FARAGHER, J.T., GULLEN, G.A., (1972): Immunosuppression by the 
Infectious bursal disease in chicken immunized against Newcastle disease Vet Rec. 90: 
385–388. 
BUMSTEAD, N. REECE, R.L., COOK. J.K.A., (1998): Genetic differences in susceptibility 
of chicken lines to Infectious bursal disease virus. Poultry Science 72, 249:255. 
73
 
COSGROVE, A.S., (1962): An apparently new disease of chicken-avian nephrosis. Avian Dis. 
6: 385–389. 
El-BATRAWY, A.M., (1990): Studies on severe out breaks of infectious bursal disease. Proc. 
2nd Sci. Conf., Egypt. Vet. Poult. Assoc. 239–252. 
EL-SERGANY, H.A., ANN, MOURSI; SABER, M.S., MOHAMED, M.A., (1974): A 
preliminary investigation on the occurrence of Gumboro disease in Egypt. J. Vet. Sci. 
11–7. 
FAOUZY, K, EL OMARI, N., TMIRI, N. JOUZI, T., (2002): Health and management 
constraints to family poultry development in Morocco. Characteristics and parameters 
of family poultry production: 73–85. 
FRAGHTER, J.T., ALLAN, W.H., WEYTH, C.J., (1974): Immunosuppressive effect of 
Infectious bursal disease against Newcastle disease Vet Rec. 90, 511–512. 
GIAMBRONE, J.J., FLETCHER, J.P., LEUKERT, P.D., PAGE, R.K, EDISON, C.E., (1978). 
Experimental infection of turkeys with Infe ctious bursal disease virus .Avian Dis. 22, 
451–458. 
HASSAN, M.K., AFIFY, M., ALY, M.M., (2002): Susceptibility of vaccinated and 
unvaccinated Egyptian chicken to very virulent infectious bursal disease virus. 
Avian 
Pathology 31, 149–156. 
HASSAN, M.K., AFIFY, M.A., ALY, M.M., (2003): Genetic resistance of Egyptian chickens 
to infectious bursal disease and Newcastle disease. Tropical Animal Health and 
production (In press). 
HOWIE, R.I., THOSEN, J., (1981): Identification of  strain of Infectious bursal disease virus 
isolated from mosquitoes. Can. J. Comp. Med: 45: 315–320. 
JOSSER, V.S., SEENEVASSEN PILLAY, M.M., (2002): Family poultry production in 
Mauritius- Problems and prospects, 65-71. 
LUKERT, P.D., SAIF, Y.M., (1997): Infectious  bursal disease. In B.W. Calnek (Ed.), 
Diseases of poultry. 10th edn. Ames: Iowa state University Press, 721–738. 
OIE Manual of Standards For Di agnostic Tests and Vaccines (1992): Infectious Bursal 
Disease. pp. 616–627. 
OKOYE, J.O.A. ABA-ADULUGA, E., (1998): Comparative study of the resistance or 
susceptibility of local Nigerian and exotic chickens to Infectious bursal disease. Avian 
Path. 27, 168–173. 
OKOY, J.O.A., UCHE, U.E., (1986): Serological evid ence of Infectious bursal disease virus 
infection in wild rats. Acta Vet. Brno. 55,207–209 
SPSS 11 (2002): “SPSS for windows Release 10.0.1. 27 Oct. 2002.” Standard Version, 
Copyright SPSS Inc., 2001–2002, All Rights Reserved, Copyright ® SPSS Inc. 
74
 
CONTROL OF VERY VIRULENT INFECTIOUS BURSAL DISEASE 
(VVIBDV) IN RURAL POULTRY IN EGYPT 
M.K. HASSAN*, A.H. AZZAM 
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, Giza, Egypt 
Abstract 
Day-old local Balady chicks, with maternally derived antibodies to Infectious Bursal Disease 
(IBD) and Newcastle disease (ND), were reared in separate pens on a commercial farm. At 1 and/or 14 
days old, the chicks were vaccinated with commercial live intermediate and/or hot vaccines against 
IBD. Also chicks were vaccinated against ND at 7, 19 and 29 days old. Sera samples were collected 
weekly to monitor the IBD and ND immune responses. At 28, 35 and 42 days old, chicks were 
transferred to the laboratory and challenged with very virulent IBD virus to evaluate the protection 
given by the vaccination programs. In all vaccinated groups, IBD maternal antibody interfered with 
development of active antibody response for the first 3 weeks of life followed by significant elevation 
of IBD antibodies at 28 days of age. The serological response to ND vaccines was not significantly 
affected in chicken vaccinated with intermediate or hot IBD vaccines. There was no significant 
difference in administrating live IBD vaccine either  at 1 day old and/or 14 days old. Based on the 
results of this study, it is recommended to vaccinate day-old local chicks, before delivery to small 
holders, with live IBD vaccine despite the temporary interference by maternal antibody.  Key words: 
Infectious bursal disease virus, rural Egyptian chicken, immunogenicity, and classic vaccine. 
INTRODUCTION 
Balady chickens are indigenous, dual-purpos e Egyptian breed, characterized by small 
body size, different colours of plumage. It is difficult to describe Ba lady chickens as pure 
breed. Despite intensive poultr y production systems in Egypt, local chicken production 
continues to play a significant socio-economic role in rural areas. Recently, local chickens 
have been raised in semi intensive farms and fed commercial feeds. 
Economic losses due to infectious diseases represent a major constrain facing the 
expansion of local chicken production. In this  regard, Infectious Bursal Disease (IBD) 
represents a significant challenge to both commercial and village chicken production. IBD 
causes fatal or immunosuppressive effect in yo ung chickens (Lukert and Saif, 1997). During 
the late 1980s, acute IBD was recorded in Eur ope and Africa and was attributed to the 
emergence of pathotypic variants of the virus known as very virulent IBD viruses (vvIBDV) 
(Chettle et al., 1989; El-Batrawy 1990; Van den Berg , 2000; Abdel-Alim a nd Saif, 2001). In 
Egypt, Hassan et al.  (2002, 2003) reported that six of se ven Egyptian local chickens were 
highly susceptible to vvIBDV. Unfortunately, no statistics are availabl e about the incidence 
and loses due to IBD in village chickens. 
In the semi-intensive local chicken produc tion, different vaccination programs are 
usually adopted during the first few weeks of life. Under village conditions, due to lack of 
education and limited access to veterinary services, IBD vacc ination is difficult and rarely 
practiced by the small holders who cannot afford to purchase vaccine vials with 1000 doses to 
vaccinate few numbers of chickens. 
This study was conducted to examine the immunogenicity induced against challenge 
with vvIBDV by the use of combinations of live vaccines and different vaccination programs 
in local Balady chickens as well as the eff ect of IBDV vaccines on the response of birds 
vaccinated against Newcastle disease. 
75
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Chickens 
In this study, chicks were derived from breeders vaccinated against IBD and ND using 
live vaccine followed by inactivated IBD and ND vaccines before point of lay. Birds were 
received as one-day-old chicks and were bl ed to monitor maternal IBD and ND antibodies. 
Chicks were reared in clean, disinfected pens  in a commercial farm and were provided with 
food and water ad libitum. 
IBD vaccines 
Chickens were vaccinated, usin g the eye drops, with one dose  of commercial 
intermediate and/or hot live vaccines (Bursimune vaccine, Biomune vaccines Co. and Ibd 
blen, Ceva Vaccines co. respectively) as  recommended by vaccine producers of the 
mentioned companies.  
NDV vaccine 
Chickens were vaccinated, using eye drops, with Hitchner B1 strain (Intervet Vaccines 
Co.) at 7 days old and with the La Sota stra in (Respimune, Biomune vaccines co.) via oral 
route, at 19 and 29 days old. 
IBD challenge virus 
The vvIBD challenge virus (FB99) was isolated from a local outbreak in Fayoum 
province (Hassan 
et al., 2002). In this experiment, a dose of 102 CLD50 per bird was used. 
Haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test 
The HI test was used to test for NDV using 4 haemagglutinating units (Beta 
procedure). The HI titres were determined in all chickens. 
IBD antibody ELISA 
Individual blood samples were  taken from 5 chicks/ gr oup and both individual and 
GMT for each group was calculated using commerci al Kit soft ware (IBD, IDEXX lab. Inc., 
Maine, USA). 
Pathology 
Bursa fabricii were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, stained with hematoxylin and 
eosin, and scored for histological lesions as described by Rosales et al., (1989). The bursal 
lesions were subjectively scored as: 1= no lesions, 2= focal, mild cell depletion, 3= 
multifocal, 1/3 to 1/2 of follicles show atrophy, 4= diffuse atrophy of all follicles. 
Experimental design 
Four hundred day-old Balady chickens were  brought and divided into 3 major groups 
(A, B and C) and kept in separate pens on a commercial farm. Details of the IBD vaccination 
regimes are shown in Table I. Briefly, Chickens in groups A were given one dose of live hot 
IBD vaccine and at 14 days the old birds were divided into 3 subgroups (1, 2 and 3). Chickens 
in group B were given one dose of live intermedia te IBD vaccine and at 14 days old the birds 
76
 
were divided into 3 subgroups (5, 6 and 7). Gr oup C was subdivided into 4 subgroups (4, 8, 9 
and 10). Chickens in groups 4 and 8 were vaccinated at 14 days old with hot and intermediate 
vaccines, respectively. Chickens in groups 9 and 10 were maintained as positive controls 
(unvaccinated and challenged)  and negative controls (unvaccinated and unchallenged). 
Starting at 7 days old and at weekly intervals thereafter until 7 weeks, chickens (5 birds per 
group) were tested by ELISA and HI test to  monitor both IBDV and NDV antibodies. At 28, 
35 and 42 days old, 10 birds from each group were transferred to the laboratory and 
challenged via the eye drop route with 0.1 ml of the vvIBDV challenge virus containing 10
2 
CLD50 per bird. Birds were necropsied 7 days after challenge (PC) and the mean Bursa 
Fabricii: Body weight (BF: BW) ratios, bursal lesion score and serum antibody titers to IBDV 
were determined.  
Statistical analysis 
Significance of difference of the mean B: BW ratios, antibody titres of the inoculated 
and control birds and the geometric mean titer (GMT) of each group was calculated and 
determined by analysis of variance and Fisher’s least significant difference test. Statistical 
significance was determined at the 0.05 probability.  
TABLE I . EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN OF IBD VACCINATION PROGRAMS OF BALADY 
CHICKENS USING INTERMEDIATE (INTR.) AND/ OR HOT IBDV VACCINES. 
GroupA Age 
 Day old 2 weeks old 
1 Hot vaccine Hot vaccine 
2 Hot vaccine Intr. Vaccine 
3 Hot vaccine – 
4 – Hot vaccine 
5 Intr. Vaccine Intr. Vaccine 
6 Intr. Vaccine Hot vaccine 
7 Intr. Vaccine – 
8 – Intr. Vaccine 
9
B – – 
10B – – 
AEach group contained 40 birds and chicken was vaccinated via eye drop route with live intermediate and/or hot 
IBDV vaccine. 
BGroup 9 is unvaccinated-challenged controls; Group 10 is unvaccinated-unchallenged controls. 
RESULTS 
Throughout the observation period of 2 mont hs, mortality rates in vaccinated and 
control birds were within the range of 1.0% per month. Chick liveability was considered to be 
normal. No clinical signs of IBD were noted post vaccination with intermediate and hot 
vaccines. 
Monitor of IBDV and NDV maternal antibodies 
As shown in Table II, day-old chicks had hi gh maternal IBD antibody titres prior to 
vaccination. At 21 days old, serum from most vaccinated and control chickens did not contain 
demonstrable IBDV antibody. Starting at 28 days old, the levels of IBD antibody in 
vaccinated chickens significantly increased regardless of the vaccination program. The 
monitoring of NDV antibody is illustrated in  Table III. Maternally derived ND antibody 
77
 
persisted in chickens until 21 days of age (group 9). The levels of NDV antibody were 
roughly similar in IBD vaccinated groups. 
Protection of vaccinated chicks against vvIBDV challenge 
Results of the challenge experiments c onducted at 28, 35 and 42 days of age, are 
recorded in Tables III, IV and V. All 8 vaccination-programs were capable of protecting 
challenged chickens against both mortality and clinical IBD signs. The unvaccinated 
challenged chicks (group 9) showed typica l IBD signs (prostration, ruffled feather and 
diarrhoea) and lesions (muscular and/or prove ntricular haemorrhage, renal injury, bursal 
edema and haemorrhage) at three days post challenge. No clinical signs of IBD were noted in 
the unvaccinated unchallenged birds throughout  the experimental period. The BF:BW ratios 
of the challenged vaccinated birds were not significantly different (P>0.05) from those of 
negative controls (group 10). The bursas were examined histologically for lesions and scored. 
The severity of the lesions was regarded as moderate to severe in vaccinated chickens and 
severe in unvaccinated challenged birds.  
IBDV antibody titers
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
17142128354249
Days post vaccination
IBDV antibodi
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 
FIG. 1. IBDV antibody titers and the geometric mean titre (GMT) of each group were calculated. 
chickens vaccinated with intermediate and/or hot IBDV vaccines at 1 and/or 14 days of age.  
 
 
TABLE II. IBDV ANTIBODY TITERS IN CHICKENS VACCINATED WITH INTERMEDIATE 
AND/OR HOT IBDV VACCINES AT 1 AND/OR 14 DAYS OF AGE.  
Group Age (Days) 
 1 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 
1 5522 1052 110 38 19002 16204 13521 12065 
2 5522 1052 110 50 17224 15504 13506 12136 
3 5522 1052 110 53 12956 10986 8194 7854 
4 5522 1676 280 107 16001 14590 13924 12771 
5 5522 1957 499 16 18276 17679 16074 14974 
6 5522 1975 499 123 17485 15995 13526 10594 
7 5522 1975 499 47 11995 10060 8160 6725 
8 5522 1676 280 168 18468 15381 12462 9528 
9 5522 1021 79 83 0 0.0 0 0 
AGeometric mean titre (GMT) for 5 chickens per group. Values lower than 260 are considered negative.  
78
 
TABLE III . MONITOR OF NEWCASTLE VIRUS ANTIBODY TITRES IN CHICKENS 
VACCINATED WITH INTERMEDIATE AND/OR HOT IBDV VACCINES AT 1 AND/OR 14 
DAYS OF AGE. 
Group Age (Days) 
 1 7 14 21 49 
1 6.0 4.2 2.4 1.4 2.9 
2 6.0 4.2 2.4 1.6 5.6 
3 6.0 4.2 2.4 3.4 3.2 
4 6.0 4.6 2.7 1.8 5.8 
5 6.0 4.4 3.8 1.5 2.4 
6 6.0 4.4 3.8 1.2 3.2 
7 6.0 4.4 3.8 0.4 3.2 
8 6.0 4.6 2.7 2.4 3.8 
9 6.0 5.6 2.8 0.8 0.0 
AGeometric mean titre (GMT) for 5 chickens per group 
TABLE IV . RESULTS OF CHALLENGE EXPERIMENT CONDUCTED AT DAY 28. BURSA: 
RECORDED PARAMETERS AT DAY 7 POST CHALLENGE. 
GroupA Bursa: body 
weight ratiosB 
Bursa lesions 
scoreC 
IBDV antibody 
titres
D 
Dead/ total 
challenged  
1 1.52 a 2/2/2/4/4 23842 1/10 
2 1.93 a 2/2/3/4/4 22859 0/10 
3 1.33 a 2/3/3/3/4 19671 1/10 
4 1.15  a 2/3/3/4/4 17089 0/10 
5 1.81  a 2/2/4/4/4 18095 0/10 
6 1.36  a 2/2/3/3/4 19707 0/10 
7 1.19  a 3/3/3/4/4 11723 0/10 
8 1.47  a 2/2/2/3/4 14378 1/10 
9E 0.88  b 4/4/4/4/4 19233 3/10 
10E 2.10  a 1/1/1/1/1 0.0 0/10 
AEach bird was inoculated with 0.10 ml of vvIBDV containing102 CLD50 of vvIBDV via eye drop routes. 
BValues are average for 5 birds. Values within a colu mn followed by different lower-case superscription are 
significantly different (P<0.05). 
CBursal lesion scores: 1= no lesions, 2= focal, mild cell depletion, 3= multifocal, 1/3 to 1/2 of follicles show 
atrophy, 4= diffuse atrophy of all follicles. 
DGeometric mean titre (GMT) for 5 chickens per group. 
EGroup 9 is unvaccinated-challenged controls; Group 10 is unvaccinated-unchallenged controls. 
TABLE V . RESULTS OF CHALLENGE EXPERIMENT CONDUCTED AT DAY 35. BURSA: 
RECORDED PARAMETERS AT DAY 7 POST CHALLENGE. 
GroupA Bursa: body 
weight ratiosB 
Bursa lesions 
scoreC 
IBDV antibody 
titresD 
Dead/ total 
challenged 
1 1.70  a 1/1/2/3/3 18986 0/10 
2 1.86  a 1/2/2/2/3 19046 0/10 
3 1.63  a 2/3/3/3/4 9572 1/10 
4 1.41  a 2/2/3/3/4 7623 0/10 
5 1.54  a 1/2/2/2/3 13491 1/10 
6 1.64  a 2/2/3/3/3 18393 0/10 
7 1.58  a 2/2/2/3/3 15565 1/10 
8 1.39  a 1/2/2/2/3 11788 0/10 
9E 0.69  b 4/4/4/4/4 14573 4/10 
10E 2.19  a 1/1/1/1/1 0.0 0/10 
79
 
AEach bird was inoculated with 0.10 ml of vvIBDV containing102 CLD50 of vvIBDV via eye drop routes. 
BValues are average for 5 birds. Values within a colu mn followed by different lower-case superscription are 
significantly different (P<0.05). CBursal lesion scores: 1= no lesions, 2= focal, mild cell depletion, 3= multifocal, 
1/3 to 1/2 of follicles show atrophy, 4= diffuse atrophy of all follicles. DGeometric mean titre (GMT) for 5 
chickens per group. EGroup 9 is unvaccinated-challenged controls; Group 10 is unvaccinated-unchallenged 
controls. 
TABLE VI . RESULTS OF CHALLENGE EXPERIMENT CONDUCTED AT DAY 42. 
RECORDED PARAMETERS AT DAY 7 POST CHALLENGE. 
GroupA Bursa: body weight 
ratiosB 
Bursa lesions 
scoreC 
IBDV antibody titresD Dead/ total 
challenged 
1 1.24  a 1/2/2/2/3 10237 0/10 
2 1.63  a 1/2/2/3/4 11706 1/10 
3 1.21  a 1/2/2/3/3 13015 0/10 
4 1.33  a 2/2/3/3/4 15851 0/10 
5 1.34  a 1/2/2/3/4 16406 0/10 
6 1.19  a 2/2/2/3/3 11969 1/10 
7 1.14  a 2/2/2/4/4 16850 0/10 
8 1.53  a 1/2/2/3/4 11678 1/10 
9E 0.80  b 4/4/4/4/4 12960 4/10 
10E 2.10  a 1/1/1/1/1 0.0 0/10 
Day 28  Cost  Score 
 chick vaccine Feed  Total No. life Price Mort Titre Total 
1(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 9 32.4 2 5 7 
2(H/I) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 36.0 3 4 7 
3(–/H) 10 0.25 13 21.25 9 32.4 2 3 5 
4(I/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 36.0 3 2 5 
5(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 36.0 3 4 7 
6(I/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 36.0 3 4 7 
7(I/–) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 36.0 3 1 4 
8(–/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 9 32.4 2 0 2 
9(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 7 25.2 1 0 1 
10(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 10 36.0 3 0 3 
Day 35  Cost    Score 
 chick vaccine Feed 
Price 
Total 
coast 
No. life Sale 
price 
Mort Titre Total 
1(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 44.0 3 4 7 
2(H/I) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 44.0 3 4 7 
3(–/H) 10 0.25 13 21.25 9 39.6 2 1 3 
4(I/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 44.0 3 0 3 
5(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 9 39.6 2 5 7 
6(I/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 44.0 3 3 6 
7(I/–) 10 0.25 13 21.25 9 39.6 2 5 7 
8(–/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 44.0 3 4 7 
9(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 6 26.4 1 0 1 
10(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 10 44.0 3 0 3 
 
Day 42  
 
Cost 
    
Score 
 chick vaccine Feed 
price 
Total No. life Sale 
price 
Mort Titre Total 
1(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 57.6 3 4 7 
80
 
2(H/I) 10 0.50 13 21.50 9 51.8 2 4 6 
3(–/H) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 57.6 3 2 5 
4(I/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 57.6 3 4 7 
5(H/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 10 57.6 3 5 8 
6(I/H) 10 0.50 13 21.50 9 51.8 2 4 6 
7(I/–) 10 0.25 13 21.25 10 57.6 3 2 5 
8(–/I) 10 0.25 13 21.25 9 51.8 2 3 5 
9(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 6 34.6 0 0 0 
10(–/–) 10 0.00 13 21.00 10 57.6 3 0 3 
AEach bird was inoculated with 0.10 ml of vvIBDV containing102 CLD50 of vvIBDV via eye drop routes. 
BValues are average for 5 birds. Values within a colu mn followed by different lower-case superscription are 
significantly different (P<0.05). CBursal lesion scores: 1= no lesions, 2= focal, mild cell depletion, 3= multifocal, 
1/3 to 1/2 of follicles show atrophy, 4= diffuse atrophy of all follicles. DGeometric mean titre (GMT) for 5 
chickens per group. EGroup 9 is unvaccinated-challenged controls; Group 10 is unvaccinated-unchallenged 
controls. 
DISCUSSION 
Although local Egyptian chickens are well adapted to the ecological conditions in 
rural areas, they are much more susceptible to vvIBDV than exotic chickens (Hassan et al., 
2002, 2003). Therefore, control of IBD is of pr ime importance for profitable village (small 
holder) production. 
Prior to the evolution of vvIBDV, conventi onal control of IBD in young chicks was 
achieved by the transfer of maternal derive d antibodies (MDA), which protected the chicks 
until an age where infection is less detriment al in terms of immuno-supression during the 
early few weeks of life (Box, 1989). Therefore, parent flocks were vaccinated with inactivated 
vaccine before laying. However, with the emergence of vvIBDV, it was not possible to relay 
only on MDA and it became necessary to vaccinate young chicks, during the first few weeks 
of life, with intermediate vaccines (Van den Berg and Meulemans, 1991). Live IBD vaccines 
of intermediate virulence are widely used but with only partial success in endemic areas 
(Zouelfakar 
et al., 1997). This was attributed to the abilit y of vvIBDV to infect chickens at 
early age in the presence of MDA titres too high to allow intermediate vaccine to elicit active 
immune response. Therefore, more invasive ( hot) vaccines were introduced to induce better 
protection against vvIBDV, however, may indu ce marked bursal lesions especially in 
chickens with low titres of MDA.  
In this study, it was noticed that vaccination of day-old chicks by intermediate and/ or 
hot vaccines was ineffective in eliciting signif icant IBD antibody response during the first 21 
days of age (Table II). This could be attributed to the interference with IBD maternal antibody 
(Lucio and Hitchner, 1979). In fact such in terference was temporary in nature and was 
followed by marked antibody response noticed in all vaccinated groups at 28 days of age, 
regardless of the vaccination program (Table II). This observation could be explained by 
Lukert & Rifuliadi, (1982) who reported that in chicks with MDA, the vaccine virus replicates 
in the thymus, spleen and cloacal bursa, where it persist for 2 weeks. Once the maternal 
antibody is catabolized, there is a primary antibody response to the persisting vaccine virus.  
The results of the challenge study conducted at 28, 35 and 42 days old (Tables III, IV 
and V) demonstrated that all 8 IBD vaccinati on programs were effective in protecting against 
both mortality and clinical IBD but not against bursal damage. This observation suggests that 
the highly invasive nature of the challenge virus (Hassan 
et al. 2002).  
81
 
Another objective of this study was to dete rmine whether IBD vaccination (especially 
hot vaccine) had immunosuppressive effect on the antibody response to vaccination against 
ND. The results given in Table III illustrate d no immuno-suppression was noticed as the HI 
titres were not significantly different in IBD and ND-vaccinated groups (P>0.05). Fortunately, 
MDA against IBD alleviated the side effect of the hot vaccines. 
In conclusion, the concept of IBD vaccinati on of day-old chicks with MDA is valid 
despite the encountered interference. Therefore,  it is recommended to vaccinate day-old local 
chicks, before delivery to small holders in rural areas. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank family poultry productions and the veterinary research 
staff at Animal Health Research Institute In  Dokki-Giza, Egypt for their cooperation. WE 
sincerely thank Dr. A.A. Abuzeed, the technical  manager of Biomune vaccines in the middle 
east for technical support and providing facilitie s. My great deep thanks to Dr. Anders 
Permin, professor of Parasitology, Institute for veterinary microbiology, Denmark for his kind 
instructions and generous cooperation during writing this work Our deep appreciation goes to 
Animal production and Health s ection of the joint FAO/IAEA Division and International 
Foundation for Science (IFS) for their technical and financial support during this work.  
This work was funded by the Internati onal Foundation for Science (IFS), Sweden 
under research grant No. B/2904-1, and under the FAO/IAEA Research Contract No. 10181.  
REFERENCES 
ABDEL-ALIM, G.A. SAIF, Y.M., (2001). Immunogenicity and Antigenicity of very virulent 
strains of infectious bursal disease viruses. Avian Diseases 45, 92–101. 
BOX, P., (1989). High maternal antibodies help  chicken beat virulent infectious bursal 
disease virus. World poultry 53: 17–19. 
CHETTLE, N., STUART, J.C., WYETH, P.J., (1989). Outbreak of virulent infectious bursal 
disease in East Anglia. Veterinary Record 125: 271–272.  
EL-BATRAWY, A.M., (1990). Studies on severe outbreaks of infectious bursal 
disease.Proceeding of 2nd Scientific Conference , Egypt. Veterinary Poultry 
Association 239–252. 
HASSAN, M.K., AFIFY, M., ALY, M.M., (2002) Susceptibility of vaccinated and 
unvaccinated Egyptian chickens to very virulent infectious bursal disease virus. Avian 
Pathology 31, 149–156. 
HASSAN, M.K., AFIFY, M.A., ALY, M.M., (2003)  Genetic resistance of Egyptian chickens 
to infectious bursal disease and Newcastle disease. Tropical Animal Health and 
production (In press). 
LUCIO, B., HITCHNER, S.B., (1979). Infectious bursal disease emulsifi ed vaccine: Effect 
upon neutralizing-antibody levels in the dam and subsequent protection of the progeny. 
Avian Diseases 23 466–478. 
LUKERT, P.D., SAIF, Y.M., (1997). Infectious bur sal disease. In Diseases of poultry. 10th 
edition, Edited by B.W. Calnek et al., Ames: Iowa state University Press, 721–738. 
LUKERT, P.D., RIFULIADI, D., (1982). Replica tion of virulent and attenuated infectious 
bursal diseases virus in maternally immune day-old chickens (abst). Journal American 
Veterinary Medical Association 181, 284. 
ROSALES, A.G., VILLEGAS, P., LUKERT, P.D., FLETCHER, M.A. MOHAMED, M.A., 
BROWN, J., (1989). Isolation, identification, and pathogenicity of two field isolates of 
infectious bursal disease viruse. Avian Disease 33, 35–41. 
82
 
ZOUELFAKAR, S, MONA, M.A., AFIFI, M, HASSAN, M.K., SAAD, F., (1997). 
Evaluation of two vaccination programs to  control IBD in commercial broilers. Veterinary 
Medical. Journal Giza. Vol. 45, No.4, 531–540. 
VAN DEN BERG, T.P., MEULEMANS, G., (1991). Acute infectious bursal disease in 
poultry: protection afforded by maternally  derived antibodies and interference with 
live vaccination. Aivan Pathology 20, 409–421. 
VAN DEN BERG, T.P., GONZ, M., MEULEMANS, G., (1991). Acute infectious bursal 
disease in poultry: Isolation and character ization of highly virulent strains. Avian 
Pathology 20, 133–143. 
VAN DEN BERG, T.P.,(2000). Acute infectious  bursal disease in poultry: a review. Avian 
Pathology 29, 175–194.  
83
 
COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO THE IMPROVEMENT OF RURAL 
POULTRY PRODUCTION IN GHANA  
J.A. AWUNI, T.K. COLEMAN, V.B. SEDOR 
Accra Veterinary Laboratory, Accra, Ghana 
Abstract 
The rural poultry production systems in Ghana and in Africa as a whole face a number of both 
health and husbandry problems which greatly limit their improvement. In the survey carried out earlier 
to highlight these problems, Newcastle disease was acknowledged as the biggest constraint. Next to 
this are diseases such as fowl pox, endo and ecto parasites. Poor husbandry practices such as lack of 
proper housing resulting in high incidence of predation, insufficient supplementary feeding are other 
factors that have further covered up the production potential of the rural chicken. The improvement of 
rural chicken production in Ghana therefore requires a holistic approach focusing on both health and 
husbandry practices. Reported here are the approaches adopted in the implementation of intervention 
measures. This has been in two phases. The first phase was based on the strategic control of Newcastle 
disease through a comparative study of the effectiveness of a thermostable vaccine (NDI-2) and an oil-
adjuvant inactivated vaccine in the protection of rural chicken against virulent Newcastle disease. The 
second phase is concentrated on showing how an improved supplementary feeding can influence the 
growth rate of rural chicken, their maturation, chick survival and productivity in terms of number of 
eggs per clutch, fertility, and hatchability. 
INTRODUCTION. 
The world’s population today stands at 6.2 b illion, with 75 percent of this living in a 
state of malnutrition, at least in quality especial ly deficient in protein. A diet based on cereal 
grains (millet, paddy rice, wheat) and supplemented with leguminous vegetables (beans, peas) 
can cover the biggest part of the protei n needs of the population. On the other hand, 
nutritional balance cannot be attained with only a combina tion of leguminous vegetables, 
poor in sulfur amino acids (cystine, methionine ), and roots and tubers equally deficient in 
these same amino acids [1]. 
Proteins of animal origin, by their richne ss and balanced content in amino acids, 
considerably increase the nutrition of diets, even when supplied in small quantities. These 
animal proteins are a capital element in nutr itional balance especially for vulnerable groups 
such as young children and pregnant women.  
Poultry farming represents one of the ways in which Africa has engaged in to increase 
its production of animal protein. It offers the be st yield in converting vegetable calories into 
high yield animal protein. Village  poultry production is widely pr acticed in Africa especially 
among rural communities. The Village poultry production systems of Africa are mainly based 
on the scavenging indigenous chicken found in virtually all villages and households. These 
systems are characterized by a minimal or no incoming supply in terms of feed and 
medications with low productivit y. Nevertheless, over 70 percen t of the poultry products and 
20 percent of animal protein intake in most African countries come from village poultry. 
Therefore, increasing rural poultry production would result in a positive impact on household 
food security both in increased dietary intake and income generation [2]. 
However, it is sad to note that rural poultry is not rated highly in the mainstream of 
national economies because of the lack of meas urable indicators. Produc tion levels of rural 
poultry in many African countries fall far below desirable levels. Outputs in terms of weight 
84
 
gain, and the number of eggs per hen per year are very low with relatively high mortality rates 
[3, 4]. Especially young chicks die in large num bers. Several reasons for this high mortality 
and low productivity have been suggested, such as sub optimal management, malnutrition, 
predation, disease, and poor quality if any of supplementary feeding [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. 
Among the disease affecting rural poultry,  Newcastle disease has been acknowledged 
as the greatest factor hindering to the improvement of rural poultry production in Africa being 
response for losses of over 80 percent of  household poultry annually [5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13]. 
Other diseases such as fowl pox, colibacillosis, endo and ecto parasites also play a significant 
role. Apart from diseases, poor husbandry prac tices (lack of proper housing facilities, poor 
supplementary feed) characteris tic of the rural poultry producti on systems in Africa further 
limit the production potentials of the rural chicken. 
Therefore programs aimed at the improveme nt of rural poultry production in Africa 
must be all embracing, focusing on the effective control of diseases (Newcastle disease, fowl 
pox, parasites) as well as encouraging a nutritionally balanced supplementary feeding. 
STUDY I 
COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE OF A THERMOSTABLE I-2 VACCINE IN THE 
PROTECTION OF RURAL CHICKEN AGAINST NEWCASTLE DISEASE IN 
GHANA. 
BACKGROUND 
For time immemorial, the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine has been used in the 
protection of rural chicken against Newcastle disease. However, vaccination coverage has 
always been very low resulting in an insignificant protection of the rural chicken flocks with 
the consequent annual high mort alities of the birds to Newcastle  disease. A number of factor 
account for this, and paramount amongst these are; – 
• High cost of the vaccine making it unaffordable to most rural chicken farmers, 
• The transportation of the vaccine requires strict cold chain facilities, which are 
not available in the rural communities. 
• Administration of the vaccine requires specific professional skills. This is 
usually an added cost to the farmer.  
• The vaccine can only be given to adult chickens leaving chicks unprotected and 
they are usually ribbed off during outbreaks of Newcastle disease. 
• The route of application of the thermostable ND I-2 can be transferred to farmers 
and this promises a much wider vaccination coverage. 
The aim of the study was therefore to comp are the effectiveness of the thermostable 
ND I-2 vaccine, which is being produced locally, and the oil-adjuvant in the protection of 
rural chickens against challenges with virulent field Newcastle virus strains, with the view to 
replacing the latter with the former. 
 
85
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The materials used for the study are: – 
• Thermostable Newcastle disease (NDI-2 ) vaccine produced locally from a  
Master seed provided by the John Francis Veterinary Laboratory, Department of 
Virology, University of Queensland, AUSTRALIA.  
• Oil-adjuvant Inactivated Newcastle dis ease vaccine for parental administration, 
virus strain Brescia > 108ELD50, Institute Zooprofilactico, distributed by 
CHEMNI DE LA MILLETIRE, BP 7562, 37073, TOURS, CEDEX 2, FRANCE, 
Batch No. 2518 
• Isolated vilogenic field strain of the New castle disease virus, Isolated in 10-days 
old chicken embryo, with a Mean Embryo death Time (MDT) of 36 hours. 
• Eye drop applicator for the administration of the thermostable I-2 vaccine 
calibrated to deliver 10-ul of vaccine dose per drop. 
• Chicken feather stripped to carry 10ul of  vaccine for the feather brushing of the 
eye route of application of the I-2 vaccine. 
The study was carried out in two ecological z ones (Coastal and Forest). In these zones 
four villages were selected for the study. In e ach ecological zone, the rural chickens of four 
women farmers in one village were wing tagg ed and vaccinated against Newcastle disease 
using the Thermostable ND I-2 vaccine by the eye-drop route twice at an interval of three 
weeks, in a second the vaccine was administered by  feathers brushing of the eye also twice at 
the same interval of three weeks. Chickens in  the third village were vaccinated with the oil-
adjuvant inactivated vaccine by subcutaneous  injection only once as has always been the 
practice. The fourth village was left as the control with the chickens not vaccinated at all. 
Blood was taken from all the chicken before  the commencement of the vaccinations, 
and also before the second vaccinations with the thermostable I-2 vaccine and three weeks 
afterwards. The birds vaccinated once with the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine and the 
controls were also bleed at the same time intervals. 
Monitoring of the immune responses due to the vaccinations was by serology 
(Haemagglutination inhibition-HI and ND-ELISA),  and also by field observation of the birds 
especially during the peak periods of outbreaks of Newcastle disease in the area (farmers 
response). Some of the vaccinated birds as well as the control were purchased for laboratory 
challenge with vilogenic field isolates of the Newcastle disease virus. Its Mean Death Time 
(MDT) in 10-days old chicken embryos was dete rmined to be 36 hours, which confirmed its 
virulence. The vaccinated birds (with the ND I-2 and inactivated vaccines) as well as the 
controls were challenged intranasally with  a drop of the virus suspension containing 10
6 
ELD50. The birds were observed for any signs of Newcastle disease (swollen head, dullness, 
droopy wings, greenish diarrhoea) and where th e birds died, they examined at necropsy for 
lesions characteristic of Newcastle disease (haemorrhages in the proventriculus, necrosis of 
the Peyers patches and caecal tonsil, haemorrhagic tracheitis, muscular haemorrhages). The 
virus was isolated from tissues (lungs, trachea, brain and spleen) and identified with 
Newcastle disease specific hyper immune serum in  virus neutralization test in 10-days old 
chicken embryo. 
 
86
 
RESULTS 
In all 530 birds were wing tagged in each test group as well as the control group. 
Equal numbers of birds were bled from each  group for serological monitoring of their 
immune responses to the vaccinations. The bird s were also monitored through a buy-back 
challenge at the laboratory and also by field observation especially during the period peak 
outbreak of Newcastle disease in the areas. 
Serological results 
TABLE I. SEROLOGICAL RESULTS FROM HAEMAGGLUTINATION INHIBITION (HI) TEST. 
No Vaccine used HI titres to Log base 2 
  0 3 weeks 6 weeks 
1 I 2 eye drop 1.8 3.2 3.8 
2 I-2 feather brushing 1.5 2.5 2.8 
3 Inactivated 1.9 3.8 4.5 
4 Controls 1.8 1.9 1.8 
Field monitoring  
Field monitoring was through interviews with farmers concerning the effect of 
Newcastle disease outbreaks in their communitie s after the intervention. In the villages where 
the chickens were vaccinated with the thermostable ND I-2 vaccine via the eye-drop route 
twice and the inactivated vaccine once, farmers were very happy with the results. There were 
no reported cases of Newcastle disease and they di d not loss birds at all after the exercise. In 
the third village were the chickens were vaccinated with the ND I-2 by feather brushing of the 
eye, farmers said there were cases of Newcastle disease but the situation was not as 
devastating as the previous year. There was re portedly no difference in the Newcastle disease 
situation after the exercise as compared to the previous year in the control villages. They were 
even attributing the deaths of their flocks to our bleeding them and it took the provision of 
drugs to get them to accept the team back in the village. 
Laboratory Challenge 
Fifteen (15) birds were purchased from each group for a challenge at the Laboratory 
level with vilogenic field virus. The birds were observed for two weeks and the results were 
drawn after the last bird died and no other bird  showed any clinical sign of disease. The 
results are shown in the Table II. 
TABLE II. PROTECTION AFTER VELOGENIC ND-VIRUS CHALLENGE. 
No. VACCINE USED Number 
Challenged
Number 
Dead 
Number 
Survived 
% Protected
1 ND I-2 eye drop 15 0 15 100 
2 ND I-2 feather 15 3 12 80 
3 Inactivated 15 0 15 100 
4 Control 15 15 0 0 
From the table it can be seen that when the thermostable ND I-2 vaccine is 
administered via eye-drop route twice, it is equally effective as the inactivated vaccine in 
protecting rural chicken against virulent strains of the Newcastle disease virus. 
87
 
A cost benefit analysis was estimated for the implementation of the intervention 
measure. The results showed that, a return of 13.8 was realized when the thermostable ND I-2 
vaccine was used in the control of Newcastle disease administered via the eye drop as 
compared to a return of 10.5 with the inactiv ated vaccine. With the thermostable vaccine 
administered by feather brushing of the eye, the returns were just 10.1. The results are even 
better (a return of 154.9) when farmers them selves administer the ND I-2 vaccine. The 
following tables clearly demonstrate this. 
COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
VACCINATION WITH THE ND I-2 VACCINE VIA EYE DROP ROUTE. 
 INCOME COST 
1.No.of birds vaccinated with NDI-2 
vaccine by eye-drop    = 530 
1. Cost of I-2 vaccine for 530 birds @  
  ⊄20 per dose, 530 x ⊄20 = ⊄10,600 
2. Survival due to vaccination (100%) 
from challenge results.   = 530 
2. Allowances for Vet Personnel for field  
  trips      = ⊄ 200,000.00 
3.Survival last year after ND outbreak 
from epidata (20%)    = 106 
3. Transportation  = ⊄ 200,000.00 
4.Differential survival as a result of I-2 
Vaccination by eye-drop,   
        530 – 106 = 424  
4. Stationary    = ⊄ 20,000.00 
5. Income from I-2 vaccinated chicken, 
average price 15,000 cedis  
   
 424 x ⊄15,000=⊄ 6,360,000.00  
5. TOTAL COST  = ⊄ 430,000.00 
 
6. PROFIT  = INCOME- COST 
       = ⊄ 5,929,400.00 
 7.  RETURNS  = PROFIT ÷ COST 
        = 13.8 
VACCINATION WITH THE INACTIVATED VACCINE. 
INCOME COST 
1.No. of birds vaccinated with the oil-    
 adjuvant inactivated vaccine = 530 
1. Cost of inactivated vaccine for 530  
  birds @ C250 per dose,  
    530 x C250 = C132,600.00 
2.Survival due to vaccination (100%) 
 from challenge results.   = 530 
2. Allowances for Vet Personnel for field  
  trips      = C 200,000.00 
3.Survival last year after ND outbreak 
 from epidata (20%)    = 106 
3. Transportation  = C 200,000.00 
4.Differential survival as a result of 
vaccination with inactivated vaccine 
        530 – 106 = 424  
4. Stationary    = C 20,000.00 
5.Income from vaccinated chicken, 
average price C15,000 cedis  
 
  424 x C15,000=C 6,360,000.00  
5. TOTAL COST  = C 552,500.00 
 
6. PROFIT  = INCOME-COST 
              = C 5,807,500.00 
 7.  RETURNS  = PROFIT ÷ COST 
               = 10.5 
 
88
 
VACCINATION WITH THE ND I-2 VACCINE BY FEATHER BRUSHING OF THE EYE. 
INCOME COST 
1.No. of birds vaccinated with I-2  
  vaccine by feather brushing  = 530 
              
1.  Cost of I-2 vaccine for 530   
    birds @ ¢ 20 per dose,  
        530 x ¢20 = ¢10,600.00 
2.Survival due to vaccination (80%) 
  from challenge results.     =  424 
2.  Allowances for Vet Personnel for field  
    trips           = ¢ 200,000.00 
3.Survival last year after ND outbreak 
  from epidata (20%)        =  106 
3.  Transportation   = ¢ 200,000.00 
4.Differential survival as a result of I-2 
  vaccination by feather brushing,    
                424 – 106 =  318  
4.  Stationary       = ¢ 20,000.00 
5.Income from vaccinated chicken 
average price15,000 Cedis 
     
318 x C15,000=¢ 4,770,000.00  
5.  TOTAL COST   = ¢ 430,600.00 
 
6.  PROFIT    = INCOME-COST 
              = ¢ 4,339,400.00 
 7.   RETURNS   = PROFIT ÷ COST 
                = 10.1 
 
VACCINATION WITH THE ND I-2 VACCINE BY FEATHER BRUSHING OF THE EYE WITH 
FARMERS DOING IT BY THEMSELVES. 
INCOME COST 
1.No. of birds vaccinated with I-2  
  vaccine by feather brushing  = 530 
              
1.  Cost of NDI-2 vaccine for 530   
    birds @ ¢20 per dose,  
        530 x ¢20 = ¢10,600.00 
2.Survival due to vaccination (80%) 
  from challenge results.     = 424 
2.  Allowances for Vet Personnel for field  
    trips           = 0
 
3.Survival last year after ND outbreak 
  from epidata (20%)        = 106 
3.  Transportation for local Vet. to District  
    center for vaccine.  = ¢ 20,000.00
 
4.Differential survival as a result of I-2 
  vaccination by feather brushing    
                 424 – 106 = 318  
4.  Stationary        = 0
 
5.Income from vaccinated chicken   
    C15,000 Ghanaian cedis per chicken 
     
318 x C15, 000=¢ 4,770,000.00 
 
5.  TOTAL COST   = ¢30, 600.00 
 
6.  PROFIT    = INCOME-COST 
              = ¢ 4,739,400.00 
 7.   RETURNS   = PROFIT ÷ COST 
                = 154.9 
CONCLUSION 
The thermostable (ND I-2) vaccine when administered via the eye drop route twice is 
equally effective as the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine in the control of Newcastle disease in 
rural chicken. 
It however, has added advantages over the inactivated for being: 
89
 
• Cheap and therefore affordable to all farmers 
• It does not require strict cold chain facilities for transportation and hence is the 
vaccine of choice for rural communities, 
• It is being produced locally and can thus be made readily available to farmers at 
their convenience 
• Its application does not require specialized skills and farmers can administer the 
vaccine on their won. 
• The returns from the usage of the th ermostable I-2 vaccine with farmers 
administering it by themselves if enormous. 
All these advantages will encourage patronage of the vaccine and lead to a much more 
wider vaccination coverage. The thermostable ND I-2 vaccine can therefore replace the 
inactivated vaccine for the protection of rural chickens against Newcastle disease. 
STUDY II 
THE EFFECT OF AN IMPROVED SUPPLEMENTARY FEEDING ON THE 
PRODUCTIVITY OF RURAL CHICKENS IN GHANA. 
BACKGROUND. 
The village level poultry produc tion in Ghana and in Africa as a whole is based on 
free-rang scavenging systems, where the bird s scavenge around for almost all of their 
nutritional requirements with little or no supplementary feeding. In the event where 
supplementary feeding is given it is usually ma de up of household leftovers or farm waste of 
very low nutritional value, which cannot cater ade quately for the needs of the bird. The result 
is that even chicks are young as day old are left to wonder into the fields in search of feed and 
often fall victim to predators. The consequence is that, very few hatched chicks survive up to 
maturity. 
The current study therefore seeks to demonstrate how an improved (nutritionally 
balanced feed ration) supplementary feeding of rural chickens help in ensuring chick survival, 
improve their growth rate and increase productiv ity in terms of numbers of eggs laid per 
clutch, fertility and hatchability. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS. 
The main material in this study is a commercial well-balanced feed (chick starter and 
Grower feed) from a recognized feed mill. The other materials used included Electronic 
weighing scales, plastic polythene bags for the distribution of measured quantities of the feed, 
daily record books. 
The study was carried out in the two ec ological zones (Coastal and Forest) 
participating in the farmyard poultry project. In each of these zones, two villages were chosen 
as the test sites with a third being the control. In a test site, four women farmer with rural 
chickens were contacted and briefed on the study procedure. A number of day old chicks were 
90
 
selected from each woman farmer and monitored over a period of six months spanning across 
the wet and dry seasons of the year. 
The supplementary feeding study targeted chicks from day old, and monitored for 
their survival, growth rate, and maturity ov er a six months period. Since the study is on 
supplementary feeding under the rural chic ken production system and not under total 
intensive system, the chickens were fed adequately but allowed to scavenge as well. However, 
chicks in the test sites were confined until they are two week old and capable of avoiding 
predation before allowed to free-range. The ch icks in the control group were allowed to 
undergo their usual husbandry practice, which is scavenge around as from day old. 
The chicks in the test group are given a measured amount of feed to last for a 
fortnight. The quantity consumed over this period is estimated after weighing the leftovers. 
The chicks are then weighed at the same two weeks interval and observed closely for the 
development of feathers, growth rate, and other signs of good de velopment. The chicks in the 
control village in both zones are also weighed at the same time intervals.  
Alongside the supplementary feeding study, a ll the rural chickens in all of the villages 
of both zones were vaccinated against Newcas tle disease using the thermostable (ND I-2) 
vaccine produced locally. The trained village vaccinators willingly administered the vaccine. 
It is important to note here that the continui ng vaccination of the chickens against Newcastle 
disease with the thermostable vaccine has had good result and this greatly encouraged farmers 
to fully embrace the current study. It was noted that fowl pox was a major problem being 
responsible for the losses of great numbers of chicks. The flocks were therefore routinely 
vaccinated in all villages together with the control of endo and ecto parasites. The only 
varying parameter was the provision of supplementary feed. 
RESULTS. 
The control of Newcastle disease through th e use of the thermostable ND I-2 vaccine, 
with the farmers now vaccinating their own flocks has had immense impact. The flock sizes 
of the households have greatly increased and a number of hens incubating eggs could easily 
be seen in all households. An indication of an improving farmyard poultry production. 
Table I shows the flocks of household at the beginning of this study. 
TABLE I. FLOCK SIZES AT BEGIN OF STUDY. 
Zone Village Household Flock size 
 Chickens  Ducks   Turkeys 
Coastal Adentan Janet Addo 79 40 0 
  M. Amenyaw 65 0 0 
  Martina Youri 53 15 0 
  Matilda Nobia 115 0 0 
 Amanfro Felicia Annan 131 0 32 
  A. Davordzie 71 0 0 
  Lydia Adabah 57 0 0 
  E.Hammon 68 0 0 
 La C.Asampana 212 0 0 
  Mabel Apen 93 0 0 
  G. A. Boye 69 0 0 
91
 
  Philis Sackey 74 0 0 
Forest Odankwah J. Dankwah 103 0 0 
  A.Achaempong 69 0 0 
  Comfort Badu 75 0 0 
  Hanna Quaye 82 0 0 
 Okwabena A. Adjo Dai 143 40 16 
  Mary Abeka 12 29 0 
  Juliana Quaye 113 0 0 
  Comfort Tetteh 96 0 0 
 Otopease E. Yamoah 135 0 0 
  Afua Otoo 79 23 0 
  Ama Kumah 118 0 0 
  Regina Essiah 95 0 0 
  TOTAL 2207  147  48 
 
TABLE II. NUMBER OF CHICKS IN THE VARIOUS HOUSEHOLDS. 
ZONE VILLAGE HOUSEHOLD GROUP No of 
Chicks 
COASTAL LA C.Asampana TEST 18 
  Mabel Apen  15 
  Gertrude A. Boye 17 
  Philis Sackey  10 
 ADENTAN Janet Addo TEST 12 
  M.Amenyaw  17 
  Martina Youri  10 
  Matilda Nobia  16 
  TOTAL   115 
 AMANFRO Felicia Annan CONTROL 20 
  Alica davordzie  17 
  Lydia Adabah  15 
  Emelia Hammon  18 
  TOTAL  70 
FOREST OKWABENA Adjoa Adjo Dai TEST 25 
  Mary Abeka  19 
  Juliana Quaye  24 
  Comfort Tetteh  17 
 OTOPEASE E.Yamoah TEST 17 
  Afua Otoo  20 
  Ama Kumah  19 
  Regina Essiah  15 
  TOTAL  156 
 ODANKWAH Joanna Dankwah CONTROL 18 
  A.Achaempong  18 
  Comfort Badu  22 
  Hanna Quaye  16 
  TOTAL  74 
 
The chicks together with the brooding hens were supplemented daily with a 
compounded poultry balanced ration. Chicks were given chick starter ration from day old to 
92
 
three months of age and a Grower feed from three months to six months of age. Table III 
shows the composition of the feed rations used. 
TABLE III. FEED COMPOSITION. 
No COMPOSITION CHICK 
STARTER 
GROWER FEED 
 
1 Metabolisable Energy Kcal / 
kg of feed 
2700 2600 
2 Crude protein % 18–19 15 
3 Fiber % 23 27 
4 Amino acids 
Methionine % 
Lysine % 
 
0.5 
1.0 
 
0.35 
0.7 
5 Mineral salts 
Calcium % 
Phosph. % 
Sodium % 
 
1.0 
0.48 
0.17 
 
1.10 
0.4 
0.10 
 
At every visit, all the chicks in both the Test and Control Groups are weighed, and as 
the chicks were tagged for identification, the average weight of the chicks in each household 
was recorded. From this, the weight gained of  the chicks in the test groups that can be 
attributed to the intervention is estimated by subtracting the weight of the control chicks.  
The Table IV below compares of the weight gain (growth rate) of the chicks receiving 
supplementary feeding and those without, on Zonal basis. 
TABLE IV. GROWTH RATE COMPARED FOR FEED SUPPLEMTATION. 
No. Zone Weight gain in gram in a fortnight 
 0        1         2        3       4        5        6         7       8        9       10      11    12 
1 Coastal 
Test gp 
21 32 57 77 91 109 144 193 225 261 306 371 434 
2 Coastal 
Control  
22 30 47 56 66 84 96 99 110 127 187 226 249 
3 Forest 
Test gp. 
22 31 59 81 100 129 170 208 229 273 312 386 449 
4 Forest 
Control 
22 31 50 58 70 82 91 99 118 132 192 236 258 
 
From the table it is clearly visible that with supplementary feeding the chick grow 
much more rapidly than without more than doublin g the weight of the latter by the end of the 
sixth month. They were fully grown pullets ready for laying. Also, apart from a few chicks in 
the test group that died from infections with fo wl pox, the survival rate of the chicks was an 
overall of 85% (230 out of 271 chicks survived to the sixth month) as compared a survival 
rate of 53 % for the control group (76 out of 14 4 chicks surviving up the end of the study). 
Most of the chicks were lost in the first two to four weeks of age to predation (rain, snakes, 
hawks and Road accidents). 
It was noticed that at the age of two weeks when the chicks in the test groups were 
allowed to scavenge around with the brooding hens, they had grown secondary feathers and 
were relatively active to avoid predation to some extent. In three months the chicks, receiving 
93
 
supplementary feed in both zones had gained al most 200 grams, which to a rural chicken is a 
significant growth.  
Weight Gain in a Fortnight
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
Time (fortnight)
Weight (gram Coastal Test gp
Coastal Control
Forest Test gp.
Forest Control
 
FIG. 1. Difference in weight gain between the chicks supplemented with balance ration as compared 
to the control group in both zones. 
 
Table V illustrates the weight gain because of  the supplementary feeding, which is the 
difference of the weight gain of the test group chicks against that of the control chicks, on 
Zonal basis. 
TABLE V. WEIGHT GAIN. 
No. Zone Differential weight (gm) gain in a fortnight 
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Coastal  0 2 10 21 25 25 48 94 115 134 119 135 185 
2 Forest  0 0 9 23 30 47 79 109 111 141 120 150 191 
 
From the results it can be seen that there is no significant difference in weight gain by 
the chicks in the Forest Zone as compared to those in the Coastal Zone. The controls in both 
zones has very much compensated for any br eed differences, since same breeds of rural 
chickens are found in the same zone.  
Differential weight from
 s upplementary Feeding
0
50
100
150
200
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
Age of chicks (fortnightly)
Weight gaine
 (g) Coastal
Forest
 
FIG. 2. Differential weight gained by the chicks receiving the supplementary Feeding in the Zones. 
94
 
TABLE VI. DAILY SUPPLEMENTARY FEED CONSUMPTION AVERAGED PER CHICK. 
No. Zone Feed Consumption per chick per day in gram 
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Coastal 0 8 10 17 27 32 33 36 38 40 42 44 45 
2 Forest 0 8 8 16 24 28 30 33 36 38 41 42 42 
 
Comparing the feed consumption to the growth rate, a relatively high feed conversion 
can be seen. However, it is important to note here that, the growth is also in part to the rich 
Scavenging Feed Resource base (SFRB). The supplemented birds mature faster and are more 
capable to scavenge around. 
TABLE VII . SUPPLEMENTARY FEED CONSUMPTION AVERAGED PER CHICK IN A 
FORTNIGHT. 
No. Zone Feed Consumption per chick fortnightly (grams) 
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Coastal 0 112 140 238 378 448 462 504 532 560 588 616 630 
2 Forest 0 112 112 224 336 392 420 462 504 532 574 588 588 
 
TABLE VIII. FEED CONVERSION RATE OF THE CHICKS RECEIVING SUPPLEMENTARY 
FEEDING IN BOTH ZONES. 
No. Zone Feed conversion rate (%) 
  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Coastal 0  1.8  7.2  8.8 6.6 5.5 10.4 18.7 21.6 23.9 20.2 21.9 29.4 
2 Forest 0 0 8.0 10.3 8.9 12.0 18.8 23.6 22.0 26.5 20.1 25.5 32.5 
Feed Conversion Rate =  Weight gained within time period  x  100  (%) 
          Feed consumed within the same time 
 
The feed conversion rate slows dow n during the dry season (around the 9 th to the 12 th 
fortnight). The chicks in the Forest Zone seem to have a relatively much higher feed 
conversion rate. This can be attributed to th e availability of a richer Scavenging Feed 
Resource Base (SFRB) in the forest. The supplem ented chicks, which mature relatively faster 
than the un-supplemented one, are more capable to scavenge and hence gain more weight 
with little intake of the supplemented feed.  
FEED CONVERSION RATE OF CHICKS 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
AGE OF CHICKS (FORTNIGHT)
RATE OF CONV. 
Coastal
Forest
 
FIG. 3, Feed conversion rate of the chicks in the 2 Zones. There is no significant difference between 
the two groups. 
95
 
TABLE IX. COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY FEEDING. 
INCOME COST 
 
1. Differential survival of chicks as a result of 
the intervention from the total of 271 receiving 
supplementation: – 
   –  85 % survival with feed ( 230) 
   –  53 % survival without feed (143) 
   – difference (230–142 = 87) these birds  
    will only count as income  
    87 x C 35,000.00 = ¢ 3, 045,000.00
 
1.  FEED COST 
1 bag of Chick Starter feed ¢ 95,000.00 
1 bag of chick Grower feed ¢ 80,000.00 
   Total cost of Feed ¢ 175,000.00 
2   Differential weight gain (190gm) 
   survival due to supplementary feeding is 87. 
Total weight gain 87 x 190gm = 16,530 
Assuming cost price of C 45,000 pre kg of live 
weight of chicken  
Total income C 45,000 x 16.530 =   
                     ¢ 743,850.00
 
2.  Stationary cost ¢ 20,000.00 
 
3.  Small allowances for field officers  
    to supervising feeding of chicks in  
    both zones @ ¢ 20,000.00 / month for  
    six months = 2x 6 x ¢ 20,000.00 
             = ¢ 240,000.00
 
 
5.  Income  
 
 ¢ 3, 788,850.00 
5.  TOTAL COST   = ¢ 435,000.00 
 
6.  PROFIT   = INCOME-COST 
              = ¢ 3,353,850.00 
 7.   RETURNS   = PROFIT ÷ COST 
                 = 7.7  
CONCLUSION 
Supplementary feeding of rural chickens sign ificantly helps in chick survival (85% as 
against 53% without). Within a period of six mo nths, birds receiving supplementary feed gain 
an average weight difference of up 190 grams, and are much more matured and ready to lay. 
Early laying will definitely increase the number of eggs per hen per because the rural chicken 
will now have a higher of clutches per year. Well fed incubating hens in an environment 
without the threat of ecto parasite infesta tions will better sit on eggs ensuring a good 
hatchability. This means an increase in productivity.  
The cost: benefit analysis estimated on only weight gain and chick survival gives a net 
return of 7.7 with supplementary feeding. This is  even without the long term benefits such as 
increased number of eggs laid, increased fertility since both the laying hens and cocks are 
well nourished, fertile will definitely increase, as well as the expected increased hatchability. 
DISCUSSION 
The two studies have clearly shown that rural poultry production can be improved 
when both health and husbandry issues are improved simultaneously.  
On health issues, Newcastle disease among rural chickens can be controlled 
effectively with the use of the thermostable ND I-2 vaccine administered via the eye drop 
route. Since new chicks are hatched almost every two to three months, a vaccine regime every 
96
 
quarter of the year will ensure that these newly hatched chicks are protected against the 
sporadic outbreaks of the disease throughout th e year. With an effective control of the 
Newcastle disease in place, the second most im portant disease is fowl  pox, especially among 
chicks. There are very potent vaccines availa ble for the protection of commercial poultry 
against fowl pox. These could be easily us ed in the rural population. The soft tick Argas 
persicus and Northern fowl mites are a big threat to the survival of rural chickens especially 
incubating hens. Sulfur based insecto-acaricides are effective in controlling them. 
On husbandry issues, a well-balanced and suffi cient supplementary feeding is vital in 
an attempt to improve the produc tivity of rural poultry. In the early days of the life of the 
chicks, supplementary feeding greatly helps in their survival, improves their growth rate and 
by the time they free-range, they are more capable of scavenging. The birds mature faster and 
get into lay much earlier. 
In Ghana, the Government is fighting hard to eradicate poverty by the year 2020. 
Rural chicken production, which is practiced in almost all the rural communities and the peri- 
urban areas, is a sure way to ensure famil y food security and reduce poverty. A holistic 
approach to the improvement of the rural ch icken production is imperative, focusing on the 
improvement of the health and husbandry practices. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The following persons and organizations have contributed immensely in diverse ways 
to the successfully completion of this work. They are: 
1. First and foremost, the International Atomic Energy Agency, which through the Research 
Coordinated Project on Improving Farmyard  Poultry Production in Africa has fully 
funded this work. 
2. Prof. Peter Spradbrow and the whole staff of the John Francis Virology Laboratory, 
Department of Virology, School  of veterinary Sciences, University of Queensland, 
Australia who gave me an in-depth knowledg e in the laboratory production and Quality 
Assurance testing of the Thermostable NDI-2 vaccine for rural chickens.  
3. Dr. Ron Dwinger formerly of the IAEA for his assistance in reviewing this work. 
4. The Director of Veterinary Services, Minist ry of Food and Agriculture, Ghana for his 
encouragement and personal interest in the success of this work. 
5. All the rural poultry Farmers in the particip ating villages for their cooperation, without 
which this work would have never seen the light of day. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  DIDIER FEDIDA, Sanofi Animal Health Guide to poultry Management in Tropical 
condition. (1995) 9–10 AICHI J. KITALYI, Village chicken production systems in 
rural Africa. Household food security and gender issues. FAO animal Production and 
Health paper 142 (1998) 1–4. 
[2]  AWUNI, J.A., Strategies for the Improve ment of rural chicken production in Ghana, 
In: Characteristics and Para meters of Family Poultry Production in Africa. IAEA, 
VIENNA (2002) 33–37. 
[3]  MATTHEWMAN, R.W., A survey of small livestock production at the village level in 
the deprived savanna and lowland forest zone s of South West Nigeria, Department of 
Agriculture and Horticulture, University of Reading, Study No. 24 (1977) 40–41. 
97
 
[4)] MINGA, U.M., KATUL, A., MASDA, T., MUSASA, J., Potential and problems of 
the traditional chicken industry in Tanzania. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Tanzanian 
Vet. Association scientific conference, Arusha (1989) 207–215. 
[5] NEGESSE, T., A survey of internal parasite s of local chickens of southern Ethiopia, 
Indian Journal of poultry Science 26 (1991) 128–129. 
[7] PANDEY, V.S., Epidemiology and economic s of villages poultry production in Africa. 
Overview, Conference proceedings, Village Poultry Production in Africa, Rabat, 
Morocco Pandey, V.S. and Demey, F. (edi) (1992) 124–128. 
[8] AINI, I., Indigenous chicken production in south-East Asia, World poultry Science 
Journal 46 (1990) 51–57. 
[9] BADUST, T.J., Improving health for poultry production in Asia, a developing 
perspective, Avian Pathology 27 (1994) 295–304. 
[10] VETERINARY SERVICES DEPARTMENT , Controlling Newcastle disease in 
village chicken, Accra, Ghana (1998) 12 p. 
[11] AEXANDER, D.J., Newcastle disease and ot her Avian Paramyxoviridae infections. In; 
Calnek, B.W., Barnes, H.J., Beard, C.W., McDougald, L.R., Seif, Y.M., Diseases of 
Poultry, Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa (1997) 541–569. 
[12] BELL, J.G., The Village chicken and disease control, Tanzanian veterinary Journal 12 
(1992) 44–47. 
[13] SPRADBROW P.B., Geographical distributi on. In: Alexander, D.J., ed. Newcastle 
disease, Boston, MA, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1988) 247p. 
98
 
COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE OF THE USE OF A THERMOSTABLE 
VACCINE IN THE PROTECTION OF RURAL CHICKENS AGAINST 
NEWCASTLE DIEASE IN GHANA  
J.A. AWUNI, T.K. COLEMAN, V.B. SEDOR 
Accra Veterinary Laboratory, Accra, Ghana 
Abstract 
Rural poultry production systems in Ghana and in Africa as a whole face a number of both 
health and husbandry problems which greatly limit their improvement. In the survey carried out earlier 
to highlight these problems, Newcastle disease (ND) was acknowledged as the major constraint. Other 
constraints included diseases such as fowl pox, endo- and ecto-parasites. Poor husbandry practices 
such as lack of proper housing, resulting in high incidence of predation, and insufficient 
supplementary feeding are other factors that have further limited the production potential of the rural 
chicken. The improvement of rural chicken production in Ghana therefore requires a holistic approach 
focusing on both health and husbandry practices. 
This paper presents the results of a study to compare the effectiveness of a thermostable, live 
vaccine (ND I-2) and an oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine (virus strain Brescia) in the protection of 
rural chickens against virulent ND. The I-2 ND vaccine when administered twice (three weeks apart) 
via eye drop was found to be equally as effective as the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine in the control 
of ND in rural chickens. Partial budget studies indicated that ND control interventions yielded a very 
high return. 
For many years, the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine has been used in the protection of rural 
chickens against ND. However, vaccination coverage has always been very low resulting in 
insignificant protection of the rural chicken flocks with the consequent annual high mortalities of the 
birds due to ND. 
INTRODUCTION 
Poultry farming represents one of the me thodologies used by African farmers to 
generate income in increase access to animal pr otein. It offers the best yield in converting 
vegetable calories into high yield animal protein. Village poultry production is widely 
practiced in Africa especially among rura l communities. The Village poultry production 
systems of Africa are mainly based on the s cavenging indigenous chicken found in virtually 
all villages and households. These systems are ch aracterized by a low or no input supply in 
terms of feed and medications, and low produc tivity. Nevertheless, over 70 percent of the 
poultry products and 20 percent of animal protein intake in most African countries come from 
village poultry. Therefore, increasing rural poultry production would result in a positive 
impact on household food security both in increased dietary intake and income generation [2]. 
However, it is sad to note that rural poultry is not rated highly in the mainstream of 
national economies because of the lack of meas urable indicators. Produc tion levels of rural 
poultry in many African countries fall far below desirable levels. Outputs in terms of weight 
gain, and the number of eggs per hen per year are very low with relatively high mortality rates 
[3, 4]. Especially young chicks die in large num bers. Several reasons for this high mortality 
and low productivity have been suggested, such as sub optimal management, malnutrition, 
predation, disease, and poor quality if any of supplementary feeding [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. 
Among the diseases affecting rural poultry, ND has been acknowledged as the major 
factor hindering the improvement  of rural poultry production in Africa and is responsible for 
losses of over 80 percent of household poultry annually [5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Other diseases 
99
 
such as fowl pox, colibacillosis, endo- and ecto- parasites also play a significant role. Apart 
from diseases, poor husbandry practices (lack of proper housing facilities, poor 
supplementary feed) characteris tic of the rural poultry producti on systems in Africa further 
limit the production potentials of the rural chicken. 
In Ghana, the Government is fighting hard to eradicate poverty by the year 2020. Rural 
chicken production, which is prac ticed in almost all the rural communities and the peri-urban 
areas, is a sure way to ensure family food secu rity and reduce poverty. A holistic approach to 
the improvement of the rural chicken production – focusing on the improvement of health and 
husbandry practices - is imperative. 
Attempts to control ND in village chickens in Ghana have not been successful. This 
has been due to the fact that the conventional va ccines available are heat labile and packaged 
in multi-dose vials making them unsuitable for use under rural conditions.  
The introduction of the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine in to the country was seen as a 
way to overcome these problems. The aim of the study was therefore to compare the 
effectiveness of the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine, which is being produced locally, and an oil-
adjuvant vaccine in the protection of rural chic kens against challenge with virulent ND virus 
strains, with the view to replacing the latte r with the former should results support such a 
change. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The materials used for the study were:  
• Thermostable I-2 ND vaccine produced locally from the master seed provided 
by the John Francis Veterinary Laboratory, Department of Virology, University of 
Queensland, AUSTRALIA.  
• Oil-adjuvant inactivated ND vaccine for parental administration, virus strain 
Brescia > 108ELD50, Institute Zooprofilactico, distributed by CHEMNI DE LA 
MILLETIRE, BP 7562, 37073, TOURS, CEDEX 2, FRANCE, Batch No. 2518 
• Velogenic field strain of the ND virus, isolated at the Accra Veterinary 
Laboratory, in 10-days old chicken embryo, with a Mean Embryo Death Time 
(MDT) of 36 hours. 
• Eye drop applicator for the administration of the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine 
calibrated to deliver 10 µl of vaccine dose per drop. 
• Chicken feather stripped to carry 10 µl of vaccine for the feather brushing of the 
eye route of application of the I-2 vaccine. 
The study was carried out in two ecological zones (Coastal and Forest). In these zones, 
four villages were selected for the study. In e ach ecological zone, the rural chickens of four 
female farmers in one village were wing  tagged and vaccinated against ND using 
thermostable I-2 ND vaccine via eye drop twice at an interval of three weeks. In a second 
village the vaccine was administered by brushing eye with a calibrated feather tip twice at the 
same interval of three weeks. Chickens in a third village were vaccinated with the oil-
adjuvant inactivated vaccine by subcutaneous injection only once as per normal practice. The 
fourth village was left as a control with the chickens not vaccinated at all.  
100
 
A total of 530 birds were wing-tagged in the test (experimental) and control groups. 
Equal numbers of birds (530 birds per experimental group) were bled from each group for 
serological monitoring of their immune re sponse to vaccination. Blood was taken from all 
chickens before vaccination, and before the second vaccination with I-2 ND vaccine and three 
weeks post vaccination. The birds vaccinated once with the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine 
and the controls were bled at the same time intervals. 
Monitoring of the immune response fo llowing vaccination was by serology 
(Haemagglutination inhibition-HI as described by [14] and ND-ELISA, kit supplied by 
IAEA), and by field observation of the birds es pecially during the p eak periods of outbreaks 
of ND in the area (farmers’ response). Some of the vaccinated birds as well as some of the 
controls (15 birds per experimental group) we re purchased for laboratory challenge with 
velogenic field isolates of the ND virus. The Mean Death Time (MDT) of the challenge strain 
of ND virus in 10-day old chicken embryos was de termined to be 36 hours; indicating that it 
is a velogenic strain of ND. The vaccinated bi rds (I-2 and inactivated ND vaccine groups) as 
well as the controls were challenged intranasally with a drop of the virus suspension 
containing 10
6 ELD50. The birds were observed for any si gns of ND (swollen head, dullness, 
droopy wings, greenish diarrhoea) and dead  birds examined at necropsy for lesions 
characteristic of ND (haemorrhages in the proventriculus, necrosis of the Peyers patches and 
caecal tonsil, haemorrhagic tracheitis, muscular haemorrhages). The virus was isolated from 
tissues (lungs, trachea, brain and spleen) and identified with ND specific hyper immune 
serum in virus neutralization test in 10-day old chicken embryo. 
A cost benefit analysis was performed using the partial budget method to evaluate 
effectiveness of each type of vaccine used. 
RESULTS 
Serological Results 
The serological results from Haemagglutination Inhibition (HI) Test showed that the 
birds vaccinated with the inactivated vaccine and the ND I-2 vaccine via eye drop were 
protected even after the first vaccination (Table I). 
TABLE I. GEOMETRIC MEAN HI-TITRES FOR EACH EXPERIMENTAL GROUP AT 0, 3 AND 
6 WEEKS POST VACCINATION. 
Group Vaccine used No. of birds 
per group 
Geometric Mean HI titres (Log base 2) 
   0 3 weeks 6 weeks 
1 I-2 eye drop 530 1.8 3.2 3.8 
2 I-2 feather brushing 530 1.5 2.5 2.8 
3 Inactivated 530 1.9 3.8 4.5 
4 Control 530 1.8 1.9 1.8 
Field monitoring of vaccinated birds 
Interviews with farmers were used to evaluate the effect of ND outbreaks in their 
communities after the intervention. In the villages where the chickens were vaccinated with I-
2 ND vaccine via eye-drop twice and the inactivated vaccine once, farmers were very happy 
101
 
with the results. There were no reported cases of ND and they did not loose birds at all during 
the field trial. In the third village where the chickens were vaccinated with the ND I-2 by 
feather brushing of the eye, farmers said ther e were cases of ND but the situation was not as 
devastating as in the previous year. There was no difference in the ND situation (mortality 
rate of 80%) after the exercise as compared to the previous year in the control villages. They 
were even attributing the deaths of their flocks to our blood sampling and it took the provision 
of drugs to convince them to accept the team back in the village. 
Laboratory Challenge 
Fifteen birds were purchased from each experimental group for challenge at the 
Laboratory with a velogenic field ND virus. The birds were observed for two weeks after 
being challenged with field virus. The results were collected after the last bird died and no 
other bird showed any clinical sign of disease. The results are shown in Table II. 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF CHALLENGE WITH VELOGENIC FIELD ND VIRUS. 
No. Vaccine used No. of birds 
challenged 
No. Dead No. Survived % Protected 
1 ND I-2 eye drop 15 0 15 100 
2 ND I-2 feather 15 3 12 80 
3 Inactivated 15 0 15 100 
4 Control 15 15 0 0 
 
The results show that when the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine is administered via eye 
drop twice, it is equally effective as the inactivated vaccine in protecting rural chickens 
against virulent strains of the ND virus (Table II) 
Cost benefit analysis 
A cost benefit analysis was estimated for the implementation of each intervention. The 
results showed that, a return of 13.8 was obtai ned when the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine was 
used in the control of ND administered via eye drop as compared to a return of 10.5 with the 
inactivated ND vaccine. With the thermostable I-2 vaccine administered by feather brushing 
of the eye, the returns were just 10.1. The resu lts are even better (a return of 154.9) when 
farmers themselves administer the ND I-2 vaccine. Tables (III,IV,V,VI) clearly demonstrate 
this. 
102
 
TABLE III. VACCINATION WITH I-2 ND VACCINE VIA EYE DROP. 
INCOME VALUE COST VALUE 
1. No. of birds vaccinated with I-2 ND 
vaccine via eye drop = 
 
530 
1. Cost of I-2 vaccine for 
530 birds @ ¢20 per dose, 
530 x ¢20 =  
 
¢10,600 
2. Survival due to vaccination (100%) 
from challenge results. = 
 
530 
2. Allowances for Vet 
Personnel for field trips =  
 
¢ 200,000 
3. Survival last year after ND outbreak 
 from epidata (20%) =  
 
106 
3. Transportation =  ¢ 200,000 
4. Differential survival as a result of I-2 
vaccination via eye-drop, ¢530 – ¢106 =
 
424 
4. Stationary =  ¢ 20,000 
5. Income from I-2 vaccination via eye-
drop, considering average price of a 
village chicken to be ¢15,000 Ghanaian 
Cedis per chicken 424 x ¢15,000  
=¢6,360,000 
 
 
 
5. TOTAL COST =  
 
6. PROFIT = (INCOME-
COST) 
¢ 430,000 
 
¢ 5,929,400 
  7. RETURNS = (PROFIT 
÷ COST) =  
13.8 
 
TABLE IV. VACCINATION WITH THE INACTIVATED ND VACCINE. 
INCOME VALUE COST VALUE 
1. No. of birds vaccinated with the 
oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine = 
 
530 
1. Inactivated vaccine for 530 
birds @ ¢250 per dose, 530 x 
¢250 =  
 
 
¢132,600 
2. Survival due to vaccination 
(100%) from challenge results. = 
 
530 
2. Allowances for Vet Personnel 
for field trips =  
 
¢200,000 
3. Survival last year after ND 
outbreak 
 from epidata (20%) = 
 
106 
3. Transportation =  ¢200,000 
4. Differential survival as a result 
of vaccination with inactivated 
vaccine 530 – 106 = 
 
424 
4. Stationary =  ¢20,000 
5. Income from vaccinated 
chicken; ¢15,000 Ghanaian Cedis 
per chicken 424 x ¢15,000 =  
 
 
¢6,360,000 
5. TOTAL COST =  
6. PROFIT = (INCOME-COST)  
¢552,500 
 
¢5,807,50 
  7. RETURNS = (PROFIT ÷ 
COST) =  
 
10.5 
 
103
 
TABLE V. VACCINATION WITH I-2 ND VACCINE BY FEATHER BRUSHING OF THE EYE. 
INCOME VALUE COST VALUE 
1. No. of birds vaccinated with I-2 ND 
vaccine administered via feather 
brushing of the eye = 
 
530 
1. Cost of inactivated vaccine 
for 530 birds @ ¢20 per dose, 
530 x ¢20 = 
 
¢10,600 
2. Survival due to vaccination (80%) 
from challenge results. = 
 
424 
2. Allowances for Vet 
Personnel for field trips = 
 
¢200,000 
3. Survival last year after ND outbreak
 from epidata (20%) = 
 
106 
3. Transportation = ¢200,000 
4. Differential survival as a result of 
vaccination with inactivated vaccine 
424 – 106 = 
 
 
318 
4. Stationary = ¢20,000 
5. Income from vaccinated chicken 
¢15,000 Ghanaian Cedis per chicken 
318 x ¢15,000 =  
 
 
¢4,770,000 
5. TOTAL COST = 
6. PROFIT = (INCOME-
COST) = 
¢430,600 
¢4,339,400
  7. RETURNS = (PROFIT ÷ 
COST) = 
10.1 
 
TABLE VI. VACCINATION WITH I-2 ND VACCINE BY FEATHER BRUSHING OF THE EYE 
PERFORMED BY FARMERS THEMSELVES. 
INCOME VALUE COST VALUE 
1. No. of birds vaccinated with I-2 ND 
vaccine administered via feather 
brushing of the eye = 
 
530 
1. Cost of inactivated 
vaccine for 530 birds @ 
¢20 per dose, 530 x ¢20 =  
 
¢10,600 
2. Survival due to vaccination (800%) 
from challenge results. = 
 
424 
2. Allowances for Vet 
Personnel for field trips =  
 
¢0 
3. Survival last year after ND outbreak 
 from epidata (20%) = 
 
106 
3. Transportation =  ¢20,000 
4. Differential survival as a result of 
vaccination with inactivated vaccine 424 
– 106 = 
 
 
318 
4. Stationary =  ¢0 
5. Income from vaccinated chicken 
¢15,000 Ghanaian Cedis per chicken 
318 x ¢15,000 =  
 
 
¢4,770,000 
5. TOTAL COST =  
6. PROFIT = (INCOME-
COST) =  
¢30,600 
¢4,739,400 
  7. RETURNS = (PROFIT ÷ 
COST) =  
154.9 
 
DISCUSSION 
The thermostable, live I-2 ND vaccine when administered via eye drop twice is 
equally as effective as the oil-adjuvant inactivated vaccine in the control of ND in rural 
chicken. 
Furthermore, it has added advantages over the inactivated for being: 
104
 
• Cheap and therefore affordable to all farmers 
• It does not require strict cold chain facilities for transportation and hence is the 
vaccine of choice for rural communities, 
• It is being produced locally and can thus be made readily available to farmers at 
their convenience 
• Its application does not require specialized skills and farmers can administer the 
vaccine on their own. 
• The return from the usage of thermostable I-2 ND vaccine when farmers 
administer it by themselves is very high. 
All these advantages will encourage patronage of the I-2 ND vaccine and lead to much 
wider vaccination coverage. Th e thermostable, live I-2 ND vaccine can therefore replace the 
inactivated vaccine for the protection of rura l chickens against ND. The partial budget data 
have shown that vaccination interventions give a high return. 
Study results indicated that ND can be controlled in rural chickens effectively with the 
use of I-2 ND vaccine administered via eye drop. Since new chicks hatch almost every two to 
three months, revaccination of chickens at three-monthly intervals will ensure that these 
newly hatched chicks are protected against s poradic outbreaks of ND throughout the year. 
With effective control of ND in place, the second most important disease is fowl pox, 
especially among chicks. There are very potent vaccines available for the protection of 
commercial poultry against fowl pox. These coul d be easily used in the rural population. The 
soft tick 
Argas persicus  and Northern fowl mites are a big threat to the survival of rural 
chickens especially broody hens. Sulphur based insecto-acaricides are effective in controlling 
them. 
CONCLUSION 
This study has clearly shown that rura l poultry production can be improved when 
locally produced ND I-2 vaccine is used to control ND. 
The results showed that, a return of 13.8 was obtained when thermostable I-2 ND 
vaccine was used in the control of ND administered via eye drop as compared to a return of 
10.5 with the injectable inactivated vaccine. W ith the thermostable, live vaccine administered 
by feather brushing of the eye, the returns were  10.1. The results are even better (a return of 
154.9) when farmers themselves administer the ND I-2 vaccine.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The following persons and organizations have contributed immensely in diverse ways 
to the successfully completion of this work. They are: - 
First and foremost, the International Atomic Energy Agency, (IAEA) which through 
the Research Coordinated Project on Improving  Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa has 
fully funded this work. 
Prof. Peter Spradbrow and the whole staff of the John Francis Virology Laboratory, 
Department of Virology, School of Veterinary Sciences, Univer sity of Queensland, Australia 
who gave me an in-depth knowledge in the laboratory production a nd Quality Assurance 
testing of the thermostable I-2 ND vaccine for rural chickens.  
105
 
Dr. Ron Dwinger, formerly of the IAEA, for his assistance in reviewing this work. 
Dr. M. Agyen-Frempong, Director of Veterinary Services, Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture, Ghana for his encouragement and personal interest in the success of this work. 
All the rural poultry farmers in the particip ating villages for their cooperation, without 
which this work would have never seen the light of day. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  DIDIER FEDIDA, Sanofi Animal Health Guide to poultry Management in Tropical 
condition. (1995) 9–10. 
[2] AICHI, J., KITALYI, Village chicken pr oduction systems in rural Africa. Household 
food security and gender issues. FAO anima l Production and Health paper 142 (1998) 
1–4. 
[3] AWUNI, J.A., Strategies for the Improve ment of rural chicken production in Ghana, 
In: Characteristics and Para meters of Family Poultry Production in Africa. IAEA, 
VIENNA (2002) 33–37. 
[4] MATTHEWMAN, R.W., A survey of small liv estock production at the village level in 
the deprived savanna and lowland forest zone s of South West Nigeria, Department of 
Agriculture and Horticulture, University of Reading, Study No. 24 (1977) 40–41. 
[5]  MINGA, U.M., KATUL, A., MASDA, T., MUSASA, J., Potential and problems of 
the traditional chicken industry in Tanzania. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Tanzanian 
Vet. Association scientific conference, Arusha (1989) 207–215. 
[6] NEGESSE, T., A survey of internal parasite s of local chickens of southern Ethiopia, 
Indian Journal of poultry Science 26 (1991) 128–129. 
[7] PANDEY, V.S., Epidemiology and economic s of villages poultry production in Africa. 
Overview, Conference proceedings, Village Poultry Production in Africa, Rabat, 
Morocco Pandey, V.S. and Demey, F. (edi) (1992) 124–128. 
[8] AINI, I., Indigenous chicken production in south-East Asia, World poultry Science 
Journal 46 (1990) 51–57. 
[9] BADUST, T.J., Improving health for poultry production in Asia, a developing 
perspective, Avian Pathology 27 (1994) 295–304. 
[10]  VETERINARY SERVICES DEPARTMENT, Controlling ND in village chicken, 
Accra, Ghana (1998) 12 p. 
[11]  AEXANDER, D.J., ND and other Avian Paramyxoviridae infections. In; Calnek, B. 
W., Barnes, H.J., Beard, C.W., McDougald, L.R., Seif, Y.M., Diseases of Poultry, 
Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa (1997) 541–569. 
[12]  BELL, J.G., The Village chicken and dis ease control, Tanzanian veterinary Journal 12 
(1992) 44–47. 
[13]  SPRADBROW P. B., Geographical distribu tion. In: Alexander, D. J., ed. Newcastle 
disease, Boston, MA, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1988) 247p. 
[14]  ALLAN, W. H. Gough, R. E. A standard haemagglutination inhibition test for 
Newcastle disease (1) A comparison of ma cro and micro methods. The Veterinary 
Record 95 (1974) 20–123. 
106
 
AMELIORATION DE LA PRODUCTION EN AVICULTURE FAMILIALE: 
CAS DE LA CÔTE D’IVOIRE 
T. DANHO, A. KACOU, S.C. BODJO, E. COUACY-HYMANNN 
Laboratoire Central de Pathologie Animale, Bingerville, Côte d’Ivoire 
Abstract 
Family poultry production without any care carries many constraints which lead to loss of 
birds. Through the FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Project (CRP) on: « Assessment of the 
effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle disease and Gumboro disease using 
immunoassay-based technologies for increasing farmyard poultry production in Africa», we 
implemented some interventions in family poultry production in 3 working groups to assess the 
improvement of the productivity compared to a situation without interventions. In group 1: birds are 
vaccinated against Newcastle disease and had parasitic treatment. In group 2: birds are vaccinated, had 
parasitic treatment and had supplementary feeding. In group 3: birds are vaccinated, had parasitic 
treatment, had supplementary feeding and chicks are protected against predators. These interventions 
showed that the best programme for the farmers is the one of group 3, which resulted in: a low rate of 
mortality due to vaccination and parasitic treatment, the improvement of performance of body weight 
due to supplementary feeding, and the increase in number of chickens in livestock due to the 
protection of chicks against predators.  
INTRODUCTION 
L’aviculture familiale se caractérise par un élevage de volailles en divagation sans 
soins particuliers. Elle  connaît une productiv ité très faible et un ma nque à gagner important 
pour les éleveurs, compte tenu de nombreuses contraintes qui s’imposent à elle, à savoir : Une 
forte mortalité due aux infestations parasitaires et à la maladie de Newcastle, une alimentation 
déséquilibrée, des pertes dues aux prédateurs. Nous avons pu confirmer l’existence de ces 
contraintes par les activités menées de 1999 à 2000 à travers le  projet de recherche coordonné 
(CRP) de l’AIEA intitulé : « Assessment of the effectiveness of  vaccination strategies against 
Newcastle disease and Gumboro Disease using immunoassay-based technologies for 
increasing farmyard poultry production in Africa ».  La première étape de ces activités a porté 
sur des enquêtes épidémiologiques et la  réalisation d’un bilan sanitaire. Ces enquêtes ont 
montré la description de maladie avec des signes cliniques évoquant la maladie de Newcastle. 
Le bilan de la coprolog ie faisait état d’une forte infest ation parasitaire. Donc nous avons 
déduit qu’une bonne maîtrise de ces contraintes majeures permettra d’améliorer la 
productivité de l’aviculture fa miliale. La deuxième étape nous a amené à entreprendre des 
interventions depuis l’année 2000 dans le but d’améliorer cette productivité. D’abord, nous 
avons effectué le déparasitage  des volailles, puis des vaccina tions contre la maladie de 
Newcastle, suivies de l’évaluation de l’efficacité de cette vacc ination par l’utilisation de la 
technique ELISA. Les résultats obtenus ont montré un taux de protection des animaux de plus 
de 80% [4]. 
Une fois la situation sanitaire améliorée, il est important de poursuivre le programme 
d’amélioration de la productivité par la mise en place de l’apport de supplément alimentaire et 
la protection des poussins contre les prédateurs. Ceci a constitué la 3ème phase de notre travail. 
Pour évaluer l’impact réel de ces inte rventions du point de vue économique par 
rapport à une situation sans in terventions, il apparaît nécessa ire de constituer des groupes 
d’élevages avec des variantes à étudier afin de déterminer le type d’élevage qui soit le plus 
rentable pour l’éleveur. 
107
 
• Groupe 1 : animaux vaccinés et déparasités 
• Groupe 2 : animaux vaccinés, déparasités et supplémentés 
• Groupe 3 : animaux vaccinés, déparasité s, supplémentés avec existence de 
poulailler pour la protection des poussins jusqu’à 3 mois d’âge contre les prédateurs 
MATERIELS ET METHODES 
Choix des élevages visités 
Le choix des élevages visités s’est fait de façon aléatoire dans un périmètre de 100 km 
autour de la ville d’Abidjan. De ux zones (zone 1: Adzopé et zone 2: Agboville) distantes de 
50 km ont servi de base pour le  choix des élevages. Ces élevag es sont répartis dans trois 
groupes d’étude. 
• Groupe 1: constitué de 2 élevages dans la zone d’Adzopé et de 3 élevages dans 
la zone d’Agboville; animaux vaccinés et déparasités 
• Groupe 2: constitué de 4 élevages dans la zone d’Adzopé et de 4 élevages dans 
la zone d’Agboville; animaux vaccinés, déparasités et supplémentés 
• Groupe 3: constitué de 1 élevage dans la zone d’Agboville; animaux vaccinés, 
déparasités, supplémentés et protection des poussins contre les prédateurs 
Travaux effectués 
Calendrier des visites : 
Période 1: période sans intervention sur les volailles: septembre 2002 à avril 2003 
• 11 au 12 septembre 2002 : prise de contact avec les éleveurs et recensement des 
poulets. 
Période 2: période d’intervention sur les volailles: juin 2003 à janvier 2004 
• 18 au 19 juin 2003 : recensement des poulets, déparasitage interne et externe des 
poulets, marquage individuel des poulets avec des bagues et pesée des poulets avant 
l’apport de supplément alimentaire. 
• 25 au 26 août 2003 : recensement des poulet s, pesée des poulets, mise en place 
de la supplémentation alimentaire dans les élevages sélectionnés. 
• 29 au 30 septembre : recensement et pesée des poulets. 
• 22 octobre 2003 : recensement et pesée des poulets. 
• 26 novembre et 17 décembre 2003 : recense ment des poulets, vaccination contre 
la maladie de Newcastle, déparasitage interne et pesée des poulets. 
• 28 janvier 2003 : recensement et pesée des poulets, vaccination contre la maladie 
de Newcastle et déparasitage interne du groupe 3. 
 
108
 
Description des détails des travaux effectués 
Recensement des animaux 
A chaque visite, les poulets sont comptés par cl asse d’âge et par sexe chez les adultes. 
Les paramètres liés à l’augmentation ou à la diminution de la productivité sont enregistrés. 
Pesée des animaux : 
A chaque visite, les adultes et les jeunes sont individuellement pesés alors que les 
poussins sont pesés par lot de 5 ou 10 animaux. 
Vaccination : 
Tous les animaux âgés de plus de 1 mois d’âge, ont été vaccinés avec le vaccin 
inactivé ITA-NEW du laboratoire LAPROVET à la dose de 0,5 ml par animal par voie 
intramusculaire. Les poussins de moins de 1 mois d’âge ont été vaccinés avec le vaccin 
Hitchner B1du laboratoire INTERVET par voie oculaire.  
Déparasitage des animaux 
Compte tenu des fortes infestations pa rasitaires notées au cours des enquêtes 
épidémiologiques et des bilans parasitaires déjà établit [3], les volailles ont été déparasitées 
avec le vermifuge polyvalent des volailles (V.P.V) du laboratoire LAPROVET à la dose de 1 
comprimé pour 2kg de poids vif. Quant au dépa rasitage externe, il a été effectué avec le 
carbaryl (sepou) du laboratoire coophavet. 
Apport de supplément alimentaire 
Le supplément d’aliment
 est constitué de son de blé, de grains de maïs concassés, de 
farine de poisson séché et des coquillages broyés. Le mélange suivant est réalisé: 50 kg de son 
de blé + 25 kg de maïs + 2 kg de coquillages broyés + 1 kg de farine de poisson séché. Dans 
les élevages concernés, la ration journalière  du supplément d’aliment par animal était de 40g 
du mélange pour les jeunes et les adultes, et de 10g pour les poussins. 
Protection des poussins contre les prédateurs 
Un seul élevage disposant d’un poulailler convenable dans la région d’Agboville a été 
sélectionné pour la protection des poussins contre les prédateurs : la poussinière est 
cloisonnée en trois compartiments pour le main tien des poussins à différends âges : de 2 
semaines à 1 mois, de 1 à 2 mois et de 2 à 3 mois. Puis après 3 mois d’âge, ils sont laissés en 
divagation. Les poussins sont conservés avec la mère poule les deux premières semaines dans 
un local à part. Ils sont nourris avec l’aliment de la supplémentation et sont chauffés au 
charbon de bois conservé dans un récipient méta llique. Les mangeoires et les abreuvoirs sont 
en matériel local (bambou). 
Méthode économique 
La méthode utilisée pour l’analyse économique est celle préconisée par W. GOODGER [5] 
• Différence en revenus = prix de vente de s poulets après les interventions - prix 
de vente des poulets avant les interventions 
• Bénéfice = Différence en revenus – dépenses engendrées par les interventions  
• Rendement = Différence en revenus / dépenses engendrées par les interventions 
109
 
RESULTATS 
Recensements des animaux  
Le recensement a permis d’avoir le nombr e total d’animaux dans chaque groupe, au 
début et à la fin de chaque période (voir ta bleau I); Il a permis de connaître aussi les 
paramètres liés à l’augmentation ou à la diminution de la pr oductivité. Durant l’exécution du 
projet de recherche, nous avons noté que la  performance des poules était de 30 œufs en 
moyenne par poule et par an. Dans tous les élevag es visités, la majorité des œufs pondus sont 
laissés à la disposition des poul es pour la couvaison. Le taux d’éclosion est de 80% en 
moyenne. Les causes et les taux de mortalité s des volailles décrits pour la période 1 (sans 
interventions) sont les mêmes que ceux des enquêtes épidémiologiques de la première phase 
du travail [3]. Les plus importantes causes de pertes au cours de la  période 2 sont les 
prédateurs au niveau des poussins avec un taux  de 50% dans le groupe 1 et de 40% dans le 
groupe 2. On note aussi quelques cas de variole, de maladies respiratoi res et des cas de vol 
d’animaux adultes dans le groupe 1 et 2 (voir tableau II). Ainsi nous avons pu noter à la fin de 
chaque période le nombre to tal d’animaux constituant un cap ital de revenu pour chaque 
éleveur. Ce capital inclus les animaux vendus , consommés ou donnés à d’autres personnes et 
ceux existant sur pied dans l’élevage. 
TABLEAU I. RECENSEMENT DES POULETS PAR GROUPE ET PAR PERIODE. 
Période Groupe/ début et fin de 
chaque période 
poussins jeunes poules coqs Total 
Sep 2002 37 34 33 8 112 n°1 
Avril 2003 20 8 16 4 48 
Sep 2002 55 46 77 16 194 n°2 
Avril 2003 25 14 20 8 67 
Sep 2002 9 5 21 2 37 
 
 
Période1 sans 
intervention 
n°3 
Avril 2003 0 0 2 1 3 
Juin 2003 18 8 16 2 44 
n°1 
Janv. 2004 26 26 26 5 83 
Juin 2003 83 89 70 25 267 n°2 
Janv. 2004 91 60 113 43 307 
Juin 2003 0 0 2 1 3 
 
 
 
Période2 avec 
intervention n°3 
Janv. 2004 25 7 8 3 43 
TABLEAU II. CAUSES ET TAUX DE PERTES AU COURS DE LA PERIODE G = GROUPE 2. 
poussins Jeunes (de 2 à 3 mois) Jeunes (plus de 3 mois) et 
adultes 
Causes 
G1 G2 G3 G1 G2 G3 G1 G2 G3 
Maladie de 
Newcastle 
0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Variole 10% 15% 0% 5% 2% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Maladies 
respiratoires 
5% 3% 10% 5% 3% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Prédateurs 50% 40% 0% 10% 10% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Accidents 5% 2% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
vol 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% (15%) (5%) 0%
% des pertes 70% 60% 10% 20% 15% 0% 15% 5% 0%
% de survie 30% 40% 90% 80% 85% 100% 85% 95% 100%
110
 
Incidence de l’apport de supplément alimentaire 
Les pesées effectuées avant et après la mise en place de la supplémentation alimentaire 
nous ont donné les valeurs suivantes :  
Avant l’apport de suppléme nt alimentaire et dans le groupe des animaux non 
supplémentés, nous avons un gain de poids mens uel de : 100g pour les poules, 0g à 50g pour 
les coqs, 150g pour les jeunes (coquelets et poulettes), 20g pour les poussins. 
Après l’apport de supplément alimentaire, nous avons un ga in de poids mensuel de : 
300g pour les poules et jusqu’à 500g pour certaines poules en ponte, 200g pour les coqs, 300g 
pour les jeunes (coquelets et poulettes), 50g pour les poussins. 
Incidence de la protection des poussins contre les prédateurs 
La survie des poussins au c ours de la période 2 est de 30% dans le groupe 1, de 40% 
dans le groupe 2, et de 90% dans le groupe 3 où les poussins sont protégés contre les 
prédateurs jusqu’à 3 mois d’âge. (voir tableau n°2) 
Statistique économique 
Afin de s’apercevoir de l’efficacité du suivi du programme d’amélioration de 
l’aviculture familiale, il est utile de connaître les frais engendr és et les bénéfices par rapport à 
la situation sans soins particuliers. 
Estimation des dépenses engendrées par l’application du programme d’amélioration 
au cours de la période n°2 : 
Les dépenses engendrées prennent en compte, le coût des vaccins, le coût estimatif de 
l’administration des vaccins, le s traitements anti-pa rasitaires et le coût du supplément 
alimentaire. 
La dose du vaccin Itanew est estimée à 25 FCFA et celle du vaccin Hitchner B1 à 5 
FCFA. Le coût estimatif de la vaccination est de 35 FCFA pour Itanew et de 5 FCFA pour 
Hitchner B1. Le déparasitage interne est estimé à 5 FCFA par poussin, 30 FCFA par jeune, 40 
FCFA par poule et 60 FCFA par coq sachant que, 1 comprimé de VPV coûte 40 FCFA. Le 
déparasitage externe est estimé à 100 FCFA par élevage. Le coût du supplément alimentaire 
distribué par mois est estimé à 80 FCFA par ad ulte et par jeune et à 20 FCFA par poussin, 
sachant que, 1 kg du mélange alimentaire coûte environ 70 FCFA. 
Par conséquent, le coût tota l des dépenses engendrées par le programme est de 6.430 
FCFA dans le groupe 1, de 119.750 FCFA dans le groupe 2 et de 7.665 FCFA dans le groupe 
3. 
Estimation des revenus 
Le prix moyen de chaque classe de poulet est : 
• Animaux non supplémentés : 150 FCFA pour  les poussins, 700 FCFA pour les 
jeunes, 1.000 FCFA pour les poules, 2.000 FCFA pour les coqs 
111
 
• Animaux supplémentés : 300 FCFA pour  les poussins, 1.500 FCFA pour les 
jeunes, 2.500 FCFA pour les poules, 3.000 FCFA pour les coqs 
• Bien que le prix des poussins soit estimé, ils ne se vendent pas en principe sur le 
marché local. 
• 1- Estimation des revenus avant l’application du programme : 
• Le prix de vente total des poulets es t de 32.600 FCFA dans le groupe 1, de 
49.550 FCFA dans le groupe 2 et de 4.000 FCFA dans le groupe 1. 
• 2- Estimation des revenus après l’application du programme : 
• Le prix de vente total des poulets es t de 57.900 FCFA dans le groupe 1, de 
528.800 FCFA dans le groupe 2 et de 47.000FCFA dans le groupe 3. 
• Résultats financiers : (voir tableau III) 
• Les résultats financiers sont calculés en  utilisant la méthode préconisée par W. 
GOODGER [5] 
• Cas du groupe1 : la différence en revenu es t de 25.300 FCFA, le bénéfice est de 
18.870 FCFA et le rendement est 3,93 
• Cas du groupe2 : la différence en revenu est de 479.250 FCFA, le bénéfice est de 
359.500 FCFA et le rendement est 4 
• Cas du groupe3 : la différence en revenu es t de 43.000 FCFA, le bénéfice est de 
35.335 FCFA et le rendement est 5,60. 
TABLEAU III. RÉSULTATS FINANCIERS. 
 Groupe1 : (animaux 
vaccinés, 
déparasités) 
Groupe2: (animaux 
vaccinés, 
déparasités, 
supplémentés) 
Groupe 3 : (animaux 
vaccinés, déparasités, 
supplémentés avec protection 
des poussins contre les 
prédateurs) 
Revenus 25.300 479.250 43.000 
Dépenses totales 6.430 119.750 7.665 
Coût des vaccins 1.555 5.855 575 
Coût de la 
vaccination 
2.125 8.015 755 
Déparasitage interne 2.250 9.360 835 
Déparasitage externe 500 800 100 
Coût de l’aliment - 95.720 5.400 
Bénéfice 18.870 359.500 35.335 
Rendement 3,93 4 5,6 
DISCUSSION 
Les résultats obtenus nous ont permis d’évaluer l’impact des interventions : 
Dans les trois groupes étudiés au cours de la  période 2, du fait du déparasitage et de la 
vaccination contre la maladie de Newcastle, nous avons observé dans les élevages, une 
absence de signes cliniques é voquant la maladie de Newcastle à partir du mois de décembre. 
Alors que cette période était habituellement  propice à cette maladie avec de nombreuses 
112
 
mortalités [3]. L’absence de signes cliniques de maladie de Newcastle dans ces élevages, 
confirme nos résultats de la 2ème phase du travail selon lesquels, l’évaluation de l’efficacité de 
la vaccination par l’utilisation de la technique ELISA a mont ré un taux de protection des 
animaux allant jusqu’à 90% avec le vaccin Itanew [4]. 
Les pertes signalées sont dues essentiellement aux prédateurs chez les poussins et aux 
cas de vol chez les adultes dans le groupe 1 et dans le groupe 2 (voir tableau n°2). Par ailleurs, 
si nous comparons le taux d’animaux rentables pour les éleveurs à la fin des deux périodes 
dans le tableau n°1, nous cons tatons que dans chaque gr oupe, nous avons plus d’animaux 
pour la période 2 (période d’application du programme d’amélioration) que pour la période 1 
(période sans intervention). Mais, nous devons no ter que tous les vaccins disponibles sur le 
marché local sont importés. Pa r conséquent, du fait des ruptur es en approvisionnement nous 
n’avons pas pu effectuer de vaccination à d’autres périodes avant novembre. 
Dans le groupe 2 et groupe 3, nous consta tons qu’après la mise en place de la 
supplémentation alimentaire, le gain de poids a tteint 300g ou plus par mois pour les animaux 
de plus de deux mois d’âge. Alors que dans le groupe 1 où il n’existe pas de supplémentation 
alimentaire, de même qu’au début des deux autres groupes, le gain de poids est seulement de 
150g au plus. 
Les meilleures performances sont donc observé es dans les groupes n°2 et n°3 où il est 
appliqué à la fois la vaccination contre la maladie de Newcastle et le déparasitage, associés à 
la supplémentation alimentaire. Ces résultats confirment l’étude de E.Sonaiya et col [6]. 
Dans le groupe 1 et groupe 2, en considérant les résultats notés dans le tableau n°2, les 
prédateurs sont la principale cause des pertes  chez les poussins et les jeunes de 2 à 3 mois. 
Alors que dans le groupe 3, du fait de la lutte contre les prédateu rs, les taux de perte chez les 
poussins et les jeunes de 2 à 3 mois sont très fa ibles. Par conséquent, le  taux de réussite des 
poussins chez les jeunes (coquelets  et poulettes), puis chez les an imaux adultes est plus élevé 
dans le groupe n°3 que dans le  groupe n°1 et n°2. En effet, au cours de la période 2, nous 
avons: dans le groupe n°1 au départ 16 poul es, 8 jeunes et 18 poussins pour 13 animaux 
adultes produits en plus à la fin de l’intervention. Ce qui nous donne la valeur de 0,81 adulte à 
la fin pour 1 poule au départ pour quelle période  ?. Dans le cas du groupe n°2, nous avons au 
départ 70 poules, 89 jeunes et 83 poussins pour 61 animaux adultes produit en plus à la fin de 
l’intervention. Ce qui nous donne la valeur de 0,87 adulte à la fin pour 1 poule au départ. 
Dans le cas du groupe n°3, nous avons au dé part 2 poules, 0 jeune et 0 poussin pour 7 
animaux adultes produit en plus à la fin de l’in tervention; Ce qui nous donne la valeur de 3,5 
adultes à la fin pour 1 poule au départ dans un élevage où il n’existait ni poussins, ni jeunes 
animaux. Ceci démontre que la protection des poussins contre  les prédateurs est une voie 
efficace pour améliorer la productivité et augm enter l’effectif en aviculture familiale 
lorsqu’elle est associée à la vaccination et au déparasitage. 
Les résultats financiers mont rent que le rendement dans  les groupes 1, 2 et 3 sont 
respectivement : 3,93 ; 4 ; et 5,60. D’après la méthode de W. Goodger [5], un rendement 
supérieur à 1 signifie que le programme appliqué est bénéfique pour l’éleveur. Donc les 
programmes que nous avons appli qués dans chaque groupe sont bénéfiques pour les éleveurs 
par rapport à la situation sans  soins particuliers. Mais, il convient de remarquer que le 
meilleur programme avec le rendement le plus élevé 5,60 es t celui appliqué dans le groupe 
n°3. C’est à dire un programme d’amélioration qui inclut la vaccination, le déparasitage, la 
supplémentation alimentaire et la protection des poussins contre les prédateurs. 
113
 
CONCLUSION 
A l’issu de notre travail, il apparaît que l’aviculture familiale contribue à améliorer les 
moyens d’existence des populations surtout en milieu rural. Soit en  leur fournissant 
directement les protéines d’origine animale di sponibles pour la cons ommation, soit en leur 
fournissant de l’argent lors des échanges. L’ aviculture familiale améliorée favorise donc la 
sécurité alimentaire et aide à lutter contre la pauvreté dans les couches sociales les plus 
défavorisées. 
Pour encourager les personnes les plus vulné rables : femmes, enfants, handicaps, les 
familles affectées par le SIDA et victimes de guerre [8], le programme d’amélioration de 
l’aviculture familiale doit être développé à grande échelle au  niveau de la population en Côte 
d’Ivoire. La population cible doit être soutenue dans l’approvisionnement en intrants tel que 
les vaccins, dont la production locale entraînera un faible coût à l’achat, et pourra résoudre le 
problème de l’importation qui pr ovoque des ruptures de stocks sur le marché. Le vaccin I-2 
qui présente des avantages scientifiquement prouvés : thermostable, facile à utiliser sur le 
terrain (inoculation par voie oc ulaire), capable de protéger les animaux non vaccinés par 
simple contact avec ceux vaccinés [1], [2], [7]; peut être introduit et produit sur place en Côte 
d’Ivoire pour le bonheur de la population. Un au tre niveau de soutien à la population cible 
doit être la mise à leur disposition de systèm e de crédits remboursables au bénéfice de 
l’amélioration de l’aviculture familiale. 
REMERCIEMENTS 
Nous remercions très sincèrement : 
Le joint FAO/IAEA et les différents respons ables du projet de recherche coordonné (CRP) 
sur « Assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle disease and 
Gumboro Disease using immunoassay-based technologies for increasing farmyard poultry 
production in Africa », Dr Ron Dwinger, Dr Ma rtin Jeggo, Dr Roland Geiger, Dr Gerrit 
Viljoen pour leur soutien dans la réalisation de ce travail. 
Dr Emmanuelle Guerne-Bleich de la FAO/AG AP à Rome, Dr Anders Permin du DANIDA à 
Copenhague, M. N’guessan Kouamé du MESRS à Abidjan qui ont apporté la correction 
nécessaire à la rédaction de ce travail. 
Le Ministère de la Production Animale et de s Ressources Halieutique qui nous a fourni les 
moyens de déplacement sur le terrain. 
Les différents chefs de zone ANADER d’Agbovi lle et d’Adzopé, Messieurs Legbo Séraphin 
et Yao Dominique d’Agboville pour leur bonne contribution à ce travail. 
Enfin l’ensemble des éleveurs pour leur franche collaboration. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ALDERS, R.G., FRINGE, R., MATA, B.V., Characteristics of the I-2 Live 
Thermostable Newcastle Disease Vaccine Produced at INIVE. SADC planning 
workshop on Newcastle Disease Control in  village chickens. ACIAR proceedings 
n°103. 97–100. 
[2] BELL, J.G., A comparison of the Differ ent Vaccines Available for the Control of 
Newcastle Disease in village Chickens . SADC planning workshop on Newcastle 
Disease Control in village chickens. ACIAR proceedings n°103. 56–59. 
[3]  DANHO, T., BODJO, S.C., ADON, H., KACOU, A., COUACY-HYMANN, E., 
Amélioration de l’environnement sanitaire de la volaille traditionnelle : cas de la Côte 
d’Ivoire. Dans: Characteristics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa: 
114
 
Results of a FAO/IAEA Coordinated Re search Programme on assessment of the 
effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle Disease and Gumboro 
Disease using immunoassay-based technologies for increasing farmyard poultry 
production in Africa. IAEA, Vienna 2002. IAEA – TECDOC-xxxx. ISBN 90-5782-
094-3. Pages 27-32. 
[4] DANHO, T., KACOU, A., BODJO, C.S., COUACY-HYMANN, E., Amélioration de 
l’environnement sanitaire et  de la production de vol aille traditionnelle en milieu 
villageois. Communication au cours de la 3ème réunion de coordination du projet de 
recherche coordonné FAO/IAEA sur: assessm ent of the effectiveness of vaccination 
strategies against Newcastle Disease a nd Gumboro Disease using immunoassay-based 
technologies for increasing farmyard poultry production in Africa. Quatre Bornes, Ile 
Maurice. 6–10 mai 2002. 
[5]  GOODGER W.J., Using Partial Budgets to assess if the interventions you 
designed/implemented make more  $ than they cost. Proceedings of the 3rd scientific 
coordination meeting of FAO/IAEA of the c oordinated research project on assessment 
of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle Disease and Gumboro 
Disease using immunoassay-based technologies for increasing farmyard poultry 
production in Africa. Quatre Bornes, Mauritius. May 6–10, 2002. 
[6]  SONAIYA E.B., OLUKOSI, O.A., OBI, O., AJUWON, K.M., 2002. Vaccination, 
feed supplementation and feed resources for scavenging chickens. Proceedings of the 
3rd scientific coordi nation meeting of FAO/IAEA of th e coordinated research project 
on assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle Disease 
and Gumboro Disease using immunoassay-based technologies for increasing farmyard 
poultry production in Africa. Quatre Bornes, Mauritius. May 6–10, 2002. 
[7]  SPRADBROW P., BENSINK Z., GRIMES S., Local production of thermostable 
Newcastle Disease Vaccine. International workshop on issues in FAMILY POULTRY 
research and development. Proceedings of  international network for family poultry 
development. 79–81. 
[8] Rapport du groupe de travail francophone da ns : International workshop on issues in 
FAMILY POULTRY research and development. Proceedings of international network 
for family poultry development. 12–14. 
115
 
ASSESSING THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COMMERCIAL POULTRY 
FEEDS SUPPLEMENTATION AND VACCINATION AGAINST 
NEWCASTLE DISEASE IN LOCAL CHICKENS, IN KENYA 
S.W. NJUE, J.L. KASIITI , S.G. GACHERU 
Kabete Veterinary Research Laboratories, Nairobi, Kenya 
Abstract 
Despite of the rapid growth in poultry population in the past decade, various constraints 
continue to adversely affect the productivity of local birds in Kenya. Sustainable cost effective 
interventions are necessary if full potential is to be realised. The impact of Newcastle disease (ND) 
control using vaccination and commercial poultry feed supplementation was assessed in 16 farms 
found in Kiambu district (ECZ II). Information on flock size, flock structure and disease control was 
gathered from these farms. F strain ND vaccine administration and commercial poultry feed 
supplementation was also done. Generally there was a notable increase in flock size when birds were 
supplemented and vaccinated. There was marked increase in numbers of growers and chicks with feed 
supplementation and vaccination. It was economically profitable to supplement and vaccinate local 
birds as returns were >1.0. Vaccination gave the highest return on investment (3,36) and feed 
supplementation the least (1,15). The high cost of commercial poultry feed discourages farmers from 
supplementing local chicken; therefore farm formulations using locally available materials should be 
encouraged. There is need to produce thermostable vaccines locally to use in local birds which would 
bring vaccine costs further down. 
INTRODUCTION 
The poultry population in Kenya has continued to increase in the past decade. There 
are approximately 29 million chickens comprising of broilers, layers and local chicken. Over 
70% of the national flock consists of local ch icken mainly kept under free range conditions. 
These chickens are a major source of protein in form of eggs and meat and a source of cash 
income especially for over 90% of the rural households (Anon, 2000). 
Although the local chicken production has con tinued to thrive over the years and the 
role it plays in poverty alleviation is documen ted (Ndegwa, et al., 2000), there still remain 
major constraints. Their contribution to the national economy and the per capita meat and egg 
consumption is quite low. Genera lly, the productivity of local chicken is low and needs to be 
improved. Poor management prac tices and infectious diseases among them, the devastating 
Newcastle disease (ND) continue to impede the full exploitation of the local birds. In the 
recent past, surveys and cross sectional studies have been carried out with the ultimate goal of 
generating data which can be used to improve  the production of these birds. From these 
studies, it is evident that interventions are neces sary in the areas of feeding, housing, disease 
control, research, extension, training, marketing and micro finance.  
This study set out to assess the economic impact of two interventions, namely control 
of Newcastle disease through vaccination and feed supplementation using commercial feed. 
116
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Study site 
The study was carried out in Kiambu district which is situated within the vicinity of 
Kabete Veterinary Research Laboratories. The choice of the district was based on results of 
two previous studies conducted by Njue et al. (2001, 2002) in Kiambu (ECZ II) and 
Machakos (ECZ III) districts which showed that there was no significant statistical difference 
in poultry production parameters between the two districts.  
 
 
FIG. 1. Map ok Kenya showing the study area 
Selection of villages and farms 
Kabete and Nyathuna v illages of Kiambu district which had previously been used for 
earlier studies by Njue et al (2001, 2002) were se lected for this study. Sixteen poultry farmers 
were selected from the two villages. To qualify for the study, the poultry farmer had to be a 
female with the main aim of keeping chic ken for enhanced household nutrition and cash 
income. Half of the farmers who were selected for this study had previously participated in 
previous studies by Njue et al (2001, 2002). The remaining half of the farmers were recruited 
from the two villages. In this study, the flock was the unit of interest. 
Study design 
Sixteen farms were assigned different tr eatments over a period of six months from 
July 2003 to December, 2003 as shown in Table I below:  
 
 
117
 
TABLE I. ALLOCATION OF TREATMENTS TO 16 FAMILY POULTRY FARMS IN KIAMBU 
DISTRICT, CATEGORISED BY VILLAGES.  
Type of Treatment and number of households (and 
chicken population) 
 
Village 
Vaccinated 
and Feed 
supplementa
tion 
Vaccinated, 
No Feed 
supplementati
on 
Feed 
supplementat
ion Not 
vaccinated 
No feed 
supplementat
ion Not 
vaccinated 
 
 
Total 
Kabete 2 ( 47 ) 2 ( 57) 2 (40) 2 (16 ) 8 (160 ) 
Nyathuna 2 ( 75) 2 ( 54 ) 2 (76 ) 2 ( 36) 8 (241 ) 
Total 4 (122) 4 (111) 4 (116 ) 4 (52) 16 (401 ) 
Study procedure 
The study was conducted from July 2003 to December 2003. Birds from half of the 
farms were vaccinated against Newcastle disease using F strain of ND vaccine via the nose 
drop route (100microlitres/bird)). The vaccinations  were started in July 2003 and were given 
at one and a half month interval. Birds from another half of the farms were supplemented 
using a well balanced commercial poultry growers mash. Feed was given to the birds of all 
ages at the rate of 50 g/bird/day throughout the six months period. In addition, information on 
flock composition and dynamics and disease c ontrol was collected using data collection 
sheets. Table II below illustrates activity chart. 
TABLE II.  ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN IN 16 FAMILY POULTRY FARMS IN KIAMBU 
DISTRICT, JULY–DECEMBER 2003. 
Activity 
carried out 
Person 
responsible 
Interval July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 
Distribute 
poultry feed 
to farmers 
Animal health 
assistant 
(AHA) 
2 weeks x x x x x x x x x x x x 
Collect 
information  
Researchers 
& AHA 
6 weeks x   x   x   x   
Vaccinate 
with ND F 
strain vacc.  
Researchers 
& AHA 
6 weeks x   x   x   x   
Data management and storage 
Derived variables and other da ta were synthesized into a ppropriate variables. Where 
applicable these were appropriately coded. Each  type of datum was entered and stored in 
separate spreadsheets (Ms Excel spreadshee t (Ms Excel 2000, USA)). These spreadsheets 
were then screened for proper coding and errors in data entry were corrected. 
Analysis  
Descriptive statistics 
Ms Excel spreadsheet was used to generate descriptive statistics of the variables 
118
 
Partial budget analysis 
The economic variables gathered were subj ected to partial budget analysis whereby 
the effects of interventions were assessed. Return on investment was used to determine the 
economic profitability whereas profit was used to compare across the interventions as 
follows: 
Return on investment = Increased income  
                    Increased cost 
Profit = Increased income - Increased cost 
RESULTS 
Changes in average flock sizes of local chickens on 16 farms participating in the study 
The results of the statistical analysis of  flock numbers obtained from 16 poultry farms 
in Kiambu district are summari sed as shown in Table III below. There was no statistical 
difference in average flock sizes during the fi rst and second farm visits (P=0.4604), first and 
third visit (P=0.9113), first and fourth visit (P=0.5729). The average flock sizes were similar 
during the second and third visits (P=0.3988), second and fourth vis its (P=0.7706), third and 
fourth visits (P=0.6492) for all the treatments. There was no statistical difference in average 
flock sizes between supplemented birds and vaccinated birds (P=0.6340), supplemented and 
vaccinated supplemented (P=0.6014). No differen ces were observed between vaccinated and 
vaccinated supplemented (P=0.3281), vaccinate d supplemented and controls (P=0.1757). 
There was however difference between flock si zes of supplemented and controls (P=0.0742), 
Supplemented birds had larger floc k sizes than controls. Vaccinat ed flocks were also larger 
than controls (P=0.0322). 
TABLE III. AVARAGE FLOCK SIZES IN RELATION TO THE TIME OF VISIT. 
             Average flock sizes Treatment 
1st Visit  
(Early July) 
2nd Visit  
(Mid August) 
3rd Visit  
(Early October) 
4th Visit  
(Mid 
November) 
Commercial 
poultry feed 
suppl.(n=4) 
21.7 27.1 41.9 27.5 
ND- vaccination 
(n=4) 
16 42.6 35.6 25.2 
Com. poultry feed 
suppl. & ND-vacci-
nation(n=4) 
28.4 38.4 40.8 29.6 
Controls (n=4) 9.7 14.1 12.6 8.6 
 
Flock composition of the 16 poultry farms visited during the study 
Figures 1–4 show changes in flock comp osition over the study period. In farms 
supplementing with commercial poultry feed, ther e was a general increase in the number of 
birds from each category on every visit as shown in Fig. 1. The highest average number was 
13 hens in the third visit and the lowest was 2 cocks in the fourth visit. In the farms where 
119
 
vaccination was taking place (Fig. 2) there was in crease in the number of chicks all through 
with an average number of 10 during the second visit. There was no much difference in the 
number of growers and chicks from the farm s where vaccination and supplementation was 
practised in the third and fourth visit as shown in Fig. 3. The flock size for the controls was 
small right from the beginning (Fig. 4). Generally the numbers particularly for cocks and hens 
were low during the fourth visit. The minimum average numbers were for cocks, growers and 
chicks in the control group during the first visit. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Avearge flocksize
1st visit 2nd visit 3rd visit 4th visit
cocks hens growers chicks
 
FIG. 1. Variation in flock size in the farms practising commercial poultry feed supplementation 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Avearge flock size
1st visit 2nd visit 3rd visit 4th visit
cocks hens growers chicks
 
FIG. 2. Variation in flock size in the farms practising Newcastle Disease vaccination 
120
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Average flocksize
1st visit 2nd visit 3rd visit 4th visit
cocks hens growers chicks
 
FIG. 3. Variation in flock size in farms practising Nd- vaccination and commercial Feed 
supplementation  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Average flocksize
1st visit 2nd visit 3rd visit 4th visit
cocks hens growers chicks
 
FIG. 4. Variation in flock size in the control farms 
Additional income and expenditure realised from 16 farms selected for the study  
Table IV below shows the additional income  and expenditure arising from different 
treatments over a period of 6 months. Income was entirely derived from the number of local 
chicken withdrawn (sold, consumed or given out as token) from each treatment group. The 
group receiving commercial poultry feed supplem entation and Newcastle disease vaccination 
had the largest withdrawal of 270 birds whereas  the control group had the least (99 birds). 
Costs were incurred from purchase of vaccine, fuel, feed and payment of labour. Feed was the 
most expensive whereas vaccine was the cheapest  
 
 
121
 
TABLE IV. INCOME AND EXPENDITURE FOR SIX MONTHS ON THE 16 SELECTED 
FARMS RECEIVING TWO TREATMENTS. 
 Commercial poultry 
feed supplementation 
(n=4) 
ND-vaccination 
(n=4) 
Commercial feed 
suppl. & ND-
vacc.(n=4)  
Controls (n=4) 
 Quantity 
 
Unit cost in 
$ 
Quantity Unit cost 
in $ 
Quantity Unit cost 
in $ 
Quantit
y 
Unit cost 
in $ 
Cocks 52 3.21 28 3.21 85 3.21 17 3.21 
Hens 47 2.56 93 2.56 130 2.56 38 2.56 
Growers 95 1.92 103 1.92 55 1.92 44 1.92 
Vaccine  0 0 1120  0.03 1350  0.03 0 0 
Fuel  133.3 L 0.77 83.3 L 0.77 133 L 0.77 83.3 L 0.77 
Labour  12 days 6.94 4 days 16.03 12 days 6.94 4 days 16.03 
Feed  862kg 0.26 0 0 1200kg 0.26 0 0 
Economic analysis of the intervention methods used during the study 
Results of economic analysis are shown in Table V below. Profits were obtained by 
the sum of increased benefits less the sum of increased costs associated with the interventions. 
The benefit considered here was the increased number of birds. It was more profitable to 
vaccinate the birds ($369.56) and less profitabl e to supplement the birds with commercial 
poultry feed ($59.87). Return to investment was obtained by comparing incremental benefits 
with incremental costs. In terms of return to investments, all the interventions were beneficial. 
Returns to investments were greatest for vaccination (3.35) and lowest for commercial poultry 
feed supplementation (1.51). 
TABLE V. RESULTS OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF VARIOUS INTERVENTION METHODS 
USED TO IMPROVE PRODUCTIVITY OF LOCAL CHICKEN.  
 Vaccination 
with feed suppl. 
Vaccination 
alone 
 
Feed suppl. 
alone 
 
Controls 
Increased income $711.54 $526.28 $469.87 $236.54 
Increased cost $532.62 $156.72 $410 $128 
Vaccine cost $34.62  $28.72 $0 $0 
Fuel cost $103 $64 $103 $64 
Labour cost $83 $64 $83 $64 
Feed cost $312 $0 $224 $0 
Profit $178.92 
 
$369.56 
 
$59.87 $108.54 
Return 1.34 
 
3.36 
 
1.15 
 
1.85 
 
DISCUSSION 
The results of this study indicate that there are differences in average flock sizes and 
structure dependeding on the type of interv ention. In the farms where supplementation was 
done, the highest average flock sizes were realised  in the third visit. The numbers of growers 
and chicks were generally high in the subs equent visits. This confirms that feed 
supplementation can contribute to improved poultry production. In this study, vaccination was 
122
 
done at 6 weeks interval to build up on immunity of flocks from newly recruited farmers. This 
was done because the results of previous base line survey conducted by Njue et al. (2001) 
indicated that ND antibody levels were higher in the unvaccinated birds during the dry season 
(June-Mid-October, Jan –Mid March) than th e wet season (Mid March –May, Mid October-
December). From this study, vaccination appear s to have a positive effect on the numbers of 
growers and chicks. However, vaccination cannot be said to have prot ected the birds during 
the study period as there was no outbreak of Newcastle disease. This confirms the observation 
by Spradbrow (2001) that ND outbreaks are only i ndirectly attributed to seasonal conditions. 
Past studies in commercial birds by Alexande r (1998) indicate that vaccination hinders the 
spread of the disease within the flocks and th ese observations are applicable to ND in local 
chickens. The number of cocks, hens and grow ers tended to decrease during the fourth visit 
due to high off take associated with Christmas festivities as had been noted in earlier studies 
by Njue 
et al, 2002.  
Economic analysis results indicate that it is economically profitable to use commercial 
poultry feed supplementation, ND vaccinati on as well as commercial poultry feed 
supplementation combined with ND vaccination. Th e returns to investment were all greater 
than one. From this study, the most profita ble way to improve poultry production is through 
control of Newcastle disease by vaccination ($ 369.5). The cost of vaccine is relatively low 
($0.03/dose) and is affordable by most local poultry farmers. Feed was the most expensive 
input ($0.26/kg). The high cost prohibits its use on local chicken. It is only marginally 
profitable ($59.87) to supplement the local bird s with commercial poultry feeds. This was 
also noted by Maingi (2002).  
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMEDATIONS 
From the results of this study, it is evident that:  
• Feed supplementation improves the productiv ity of local birds but the profit 
margin is much lower when they are s upplemented with commercial poultry feed.  
Therefore farm feed formulations usin g locally available material should be 
encouraged. These include sorghum, cassava , cow peas, Amaranthus seeds, fish 
(Dagga), among others. These feedstuffs are cheap than the conventional feeds and 
are more readily available. The estimate d costs of dagga is $ 0.64 , sorghum $0.19, 
cassava $0.26, and, cowpeas $0.32 per kg,. The amaranthus seed is normally free in 
the villages. 
• Vaccination against Newcastle disease leads to improved local poultry 
production. There is need to produce thermo stable vaccines locally which would 
bring vaccine costs further down.The other advantage is the possibility of smaller 
and appropriate doses for the small flocks 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the owners of local chicken and veterinary staff of 
Kiambu district, Kenya fo r their cooperation, which made this work successful. We are also 
indebted to the staff of Epidemiology and Economics unit as well as Central Veterinary 
Laboratories for their tremendous support and goodw ill. Our gratitude goes to the Director of 
Veterinary Services for granting permission to present and publish this work.  
123
 
Our deep appreciation goes to former IAEA Project Technical Officers for Research Contract 
No. KEN10184/FAO, Drs Ron Dwinger, Martyn Jeggo, Roland Geiger and the current 
Project Technical Officer Gerrit Viljoen for their support during the implementation of the 
research contract. The authors’ support for each  other was a very useful ingredient for the 
success of this contract. This work was c onducted under FAO/IAEA joint Division, Research 
Contract No. KEN10184/FAO. 
 
REFERENCES 
ALEXANDER, D.J., Newcastle disease: Methods  of spread. In: Alexander, D.J. ed. 
Newcastle Disease. Boston, Kluver Academic Publishers, 256-272 
ANON, Annual report, Livestock production, Ministry of Agriculture and rural Development, 
Government of Kenya, Nairobi (2000) 
MAINGI, I., Feeds: Poultry as a tool  for Poverty Alleviation. (Proc. 2
nd National Poultry 
Workshop. Mombasa 2002) 
NDEGWA, J.M., NORRISH, P., MEAD, R., KIMANI, C.W., WACHIRA, A.M.., A research 
process and methodology focussing on indigenous Kenyan chicken. (Proc.21 st world’s 
Poultry cong.Montreal 2000), pp3-12  
NJUE, S.W., KASIITI, J.L., MACHARIA, J.M., GACHERU, S.G., MBUGUA, H.C.W.,  
 A survey of disease status of village chicken in Kenya. (Proc. AIMVT conf. 
Copenhagen, 2001), pp 36 
NJUE, S.W., KASIITI, J.L., MACHARIA, J.M., GACHERU, S.G., MBUGUA, H.C.W., 
Characteristics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa: Health and 
management improvements of family poultr y production in Africa. IAEA-TECDOC, 
Vienna (2002) 39-46 
SPRADBROW, P.B., The Epidemiology of Newcastle Disease in village chickens: SADC 
planning workshop on Newcastle disease control in village chickens (ACIAR 
proccedings No. 103) 
124
 
IMPACTS DE LA VACCINATION ANTI - MALADIE DE NEWCASTLE ET 
DU DEPARASITAGE DES POUSSINS SOUS MERE SUR LA 
PRODUCTIVITE DE L’AVICULTURE VILLAGEOISE A MADAGASCAR 
M. KOKO1, O.F. MAMINIAINA1; J. RAVAOMANANA2; S.J. 
RAKOTONINDRINA2 
1Institut Malgache des Vaccins Vétérinaires, Ministère de l’Education National et de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
2Département de Recherches Zootechniques et Vétérinaires, FOFIFA, Ministère de 
l’Education National et de la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo Madagascar 
Résumé 
L’enquête socio-économique et épidémiologique effectuée au niveau de l’aviculture 
villageoise malgache a révélé l’importance des contraintes sanitaires, en particulier, de la maladie de 
Newcastle (MN) et des parasitoses internes dans la limitation de la productivité du sous-secteur 
avicole traditionnel. Dans le but d’améliorer cette productivité, une vaccination anti-MN pour toutes 
les classes et un déparasitage des poussins sous mère ont été entrepris afin de maîtriser ces deux 
facteurs majeurs de mortalité. L’évaluation des résultats obtenus, selon les paramètres « mortalité » et 
« variation des cheptels » est en faveur des impacts positifs des interventions, avec une augmentation 
de +49% l’année des effectifs élevés, une augmentation de +166% des effectifs exploités, une 
diminution du taux de mortalité globale de 39% environ à 21% pendant la même période. En se 
référant sur les effets résiduels des contraintes sanitaires liées aux maladies ciblées, il en ressort que 
les résultats sont effectivement en rapport avec la maîtrise de la MN et des parasitoses internes des 
poussins sous mère. 
Abstract 
IMPACTS OF ANTI-NEWCASTLE DISEASE V ACCINATION AND CHICKS ANTI-PARASITIC 
TREA TMENT ON VILLAGE POULTRY PRODUCTION IN MADAGASCAR.  
The socio-economic and epidemiological survey carried out on village poultry in Madagascar 
revealed the importance of health constraints, particularly Newcastle disease (ND) and internal 
parasites, in limiting the productivity of the traditional poultry sub sector. With the aim of improving 
this productivity anti-ND vaccination for all classes of birds and anti-parasite treatment of chicks was 
undertaken so as to control these two major factors contributing to mortality. Evaluation of the results 
obtained for mortality and variation in numbers suggested a positive effect of the interventions, with 
an increase of 49% in the numbers raised, an increase of 166% in the numbers used, and an overall 
decrease in mortality from 39% to 21% in the same period. The residual prevalence of the two 
diseases targeted suggested that they had been controlled. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
A Madagascar, l’élevage des volailles de race locale fait partie intégrante des activités 
des populations partout dans le territoire national, en particu lier en milieux rural et péri-
urbain. 
Dans les zones rurales, le système d’élevage de type traditionnel est caractérisé par de 
faibles intrants : peu ou pa s de complémentation aliment aire, absence de poulaillers, 
insuffisance ou même absence de protecti on sanitaire ou amélio ration génétique. En 
conséquence, les retombées socio-économiques restent relativement faibles [1]. 
125
 
L’enquête socio-économique et épidémiologique  effectuée au niveau de l’aviculture 
villageoise malgache dans deux zones écologiques différentes a confirmé cette faiblesse de 
revenus tirés du sous-secteur avicole traditionnel : une famille bénéficie en moyenne, 
seulement de 7 volailles en bonne  santé l’année (la partie c onsommée après chaque passage 
de maladie de Newcastle, non comprise) [2]. La même enquête a permis de révéler la 
présence de plusieurs contraintes entraînant la stagnation de la productivité du système. 
Toutefois, pour le genre 
Gallus, ces contraintes sont dominées par la maladie de Newcastle 
(MN) et le parasitisme interne. Si la MN intéresse toutes les classes, les maladies causées par 
les vers parasites touchent principalement les po ussins. D’autres maladies infectieuses ont été 
rencontrées, à savoir, la variole et la pasteurellose  aviaires, mais en se référant sur les résultas 
obtenus, leurs impacts restent marginaux dans les deux zones d’étude. 
Le présent projet se propose de maîtriser ces deux contraintes majeures en vaccinant 
tout le cheptel contre la para myxovirose et en traitant syst ématiquement tous les poussins 
sous mère avec un anti-parasitaire.  La période d’expérimentati on va du mois de décembre 
2000 au mois de novembre 2001 soit une durée totale de 12 mois. 
MATERIEL ET METHODES 
Zones d’étude 
Les zones d’expérimentation sont celles de l’enquête épidémiologique effectuée 
durant l’année 1999-2000, à savoir (voir FIG. 1) 
• la zone écologique n°1 d’Ambohimangakely avec ses trois villages numérotés 11, 
12 et 13 (Ambohimangakely, Betsizaraina et Alatsinainy).  
• La zone écologique n°2 de Moramanga av ec ses trois villages numérotés 21, 22 et 
23 (Mangoro-Ankarahara, Ankarefo et Ambodin’Ifody Gara). 
 
 
FIG. 1. Carte des zones d’interventions 
Protocole 
Il s’agit de mettre en œuvre un programme de  traitement approprié  contre les vers 
parasites, chez les poussins en  particulier, et de fixer un planning de vaccination anti-
Newcastle sur la totalité du cheptel étudié (FIG. 2). 
 
126
 
Traitement anti-parasitaire 
Deux anthelminthiques ont été utilisé : le pr emier est un produit à base du tétramisole 
de nom déposé Sodivermyl ® (BIARD), administré à la dose de 1 comprimé par kg de poids 
vif ; le deuxième est un ve rmifuge polyvalent (LAPROVET) renfermant du lévamisole, du 
niclosamide et de la vitamine A, administré à la dose de 1 comprimé par 2 kg de poids vif. 
Le rythme individuel des traitements des poussins conçus à titre préventif tient compte 
de la dynamique de l’ apparition des maladies parasitaires constaté e lors de l’enquête 
épidémiologique ; autrement dit, le premier traitement doit avoir lieu avant l’apparition des 
premiers symptômes. Aussi, le premier drogage a été programmé vers la fin de la première 
semaine (à 5–7 jours d’âge) ; le second, à un mois une semaine (37 jours) d’âge et le dernier à 
2 mois et une semaine d’âge (67 jours d’éclosion du poussin). Par conséquent, chaque couvée 
reçoit trois traitements espa cés chacun d’un mois, couvrant ainsi normalement toute la 
période de vie des poussins avec leurs mères. 
Vaccination anti-Newcastle 
Le premier vaccin anti-Newcastle utilisé est le vaccin TAD NDV vac Hitchner B1 ®, 
dont le conditionnement s’élève à 1000 doses pa r flacon. Chaque flacon est dilué avec 50 ml 
d’eau de puits d’origine locale de manière à avoir une dose par 50µl. Le vaccin est administré 
par voie oculaire sous un volum e de 25µl par oeil. Chaque i ndividu reçoit une dose quel que 
soit l’âge, répétée deux fois à un mois d’intervalle. La durée d’immunité est estimée à 4 mois. 
Le poussin est vacciné à partir de 15j d’âge. 
Le deuxième vaccin concerne la Pestavia® : vaccin anti-Newcastle à souche 
Mukteswar, produit localement par l’Institut Malgache des Vaccins Vétérinaires (IMVAVET) 
sur cellules, il est administré en S/C à la dose de 1 ml par individu. Pour les poussins de 15j, 
la dose est réduite à 0,5 ml. La durée d’immunité est estimée à 1 an 
Pour les deux vaccins expérimentés, une primo-vaccination est suivi d’une vaccination 
à 1 mois d’intervalle. 
 1 er 
Drogage 
 2 ème 
Drogage 
 3 ème 
Drogage 
      
      
Eclosion      
 5-7 j. 15 j. 37 j. 45 j. 65-67 j. 
   
 
   
  1
ére 
Vaccination 
 2 ème 
Vaccination 
 
FIG. 2. Protocole de déparasitage et de vaccination anti-MN 
Collecte des données 
La collecte des données consiste à compte r sur des fiches le nombre des volailles 
existantes à l’occasion des descentes mensuelles. Les mouvements sont marqués, qu’ils soient 
sous forme de vente/consommation/don, de vol ou de disparition, de changement de classe ou 
de mortalité. En ce qui concerne les mortalités, elles sont identifiées en fonction de leurs 
causes sur la fiche d’évolution du cheptel. 
127
 
Analyse économique 
L’analyse économique permet de voir la rentabilité, ou non, des interventions 
entreprises. Il s’agit donc de comparer les coûts de production aux revenus générés. 
RESULTATS 
Evolution du cheptel 
Effectifs réels 
La variation mensuelle des effectifs r éels autrement dit, du nombre de volailles 
élevées pendant 12 mois de suivi, calculée en fonction de l’effectif initial, chez 35 familles 
encadrées montre une successiond de période s soit de régression soit d’augmentation. 
L’effectif aviaire passe de 738 à 521 de décem bre 2000 au mois d’avril 2001 puis augmente 
du mois de mai jusqu’au mois de novembre 2001 (Tableau I). 
TABLEAU I. EVOLUTION DES EFFECTIFS ELEVES DES DEUX ZONES. 
 
Dates 
Classe 
poussin 
(C) 
Classe 
poulette 
(G) 
Classe 
adulte 
femelle 
(AF) 
Classe 
adulte 
mâle 
(AM) 
 
Effectif 
Total 
% 
d’augmentation
(v.s régression) 
Déc. 2000 321 263 114 40 738 - 
Janv. 2001 291 225 111 34 661 -10,43 
Fev 2001 267 204 111 24 606 -17,88 
Mars 2001 207 187 109 22 625 -5,15 
Avril 2001 192 195 108 26 521 -29,40 
Mai 2001 243 191 128 34 596 -19,24 
Juin 2001 435 220 139 39 833 +12,87 
Juillet 2001 591 212 150 39 992 +34,41 
Août 2001 471 283 154 40 948 +28,45 
Sept.2001 483 296 162 44 985 +33,46 
Oct. 2001 458 360 173 47 1038 +40,65 
Nov. 2001 511 367 176 45 1099 +48,91 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
Dez 00
Jan 01
Feb 01
Mrz 01
Apr 01
Mai 01
Jun 01
Jul 01
Aug 01
Sep 01
Okt 01
Nov 01
Dates
Effectifs       
Zone 1 Zone 2 Zones 1 et  2
 
FIG. 3. Courbe d’évolution des effectifs en 12 mois  
128
 
En traçant les courbes correspondantes à l’évol ution de chaque classe, les variations 
mensuelles ci-dessus décr ites deviennent beaucoup plus visibl es. La courbe représentant le 
cheptel total régresse pendant les quatre premiers mois (jusqu’au mois d’avril) et de là, 
remonte à partir du mois de mai pour rester croissante jusqu’à la fin du suivi (novembre 2001) 
avec toutefois, une petite phase décroissante au mois d’août 2001 (FIG. 3). 
Il est à remarquer que la variation de l’effectif total est parallèle à celle des poussins 
qui présente une très nette augmentation du mois de mai au mois de juillet 2001 (Tableau I). 
Enfin, le nombre des adultes reste quasi-st ationnaire avec une moyenne de 5 poules et 
un peu plus d’un coq par ménage à la fin du suivi. 
Effectifs exploités 
Le nombre de volailles exploitées durant le s 12 mois représente 97,3 % de l’effectif 
initial (718 sur 738 volailles), un ta ux d’exploitation très élevé. Cette situation explique 
l’apparente stagnation de l’ effectif qui, pendant la mê me période, n’a connu qu’une 
augmentation relativement modeste de +48,9 %. (Tableau II) 
TABLEAU II. EVOLUTION DES EFFECTIFS EXPLOITE. 
Périodes C G AF AM Effectif Total 
Déc. 2000 - - - - - 
Janv. 2001 0 68 3 3 74 
Février 2001 4 119 5 5 133 
Mars 2001 2 58 6 0 66 
Avril 2001 10 42 4 1 57 
Mai 2001 7 30 0 1 38 
Juin 2001 0 29 1 1 31 
Juillet 2001 0 29 4 3 36 
Août 2001 1 67 4 1 73 
Sept.2001 3 48 1 0 52 
Octobre 2001 3 72 5 2 82 
Nov. 2001 0 68 5 3 76 
Total 30 630 38 20 718 
Pourcentage 4,2 % 87,7 % 5,3 % 2,8 % 100 % 
 
L’exploitation de volailles a lieu durant toute l’année. Toutefois, il existe des périodes 
d’affluence pendant lesquelles le taux d’exploitation reste très élevé: c’est le cas de la saison 
située entre le mois de janvier jusqu’au mois d’avril avec un pic au mois de février et 
également de la période comprise entre le mois d’août jusqu’au mois de novembre (FIG. 4). 
Entre les deux saisons favorable s existe une petite période ma igre de durée égale à 3 mois 
(mai à juin) où l’exploitation est minimale: elle correspond précisément à la phase de 
reproduction maximale de s volailles dans le système trad itionnel et par conséquent, au 
rajeunissement du cheptel.  
Suivant la répartition des volailles exploitées par classe d’âge, il est clair que le poulet 
est le produit principal de l’aviculture villageoise malgache: il représente à lui tout seul plus 
de 87% de la partie exploitée.  
129
 
74
133
66 57
38 31 36
73
52
82 76
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
déc-0
0
janv-01
Fev-
01
mars-
01
avr-01
mai-01
juin-0
1
juil-01
aoû
t-01
se
pt-
01
oct-01
nov-
01
Effectifs élevés
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
nombre de partie exploitée 
Exploité Poussin Poulet Adulte Total
 
FIG. 4. Courbe d’évolution des effectifs élevés et la partie exploitée 
Répartition des effectifs exploités par destination 
La répartition par destination de la partie exploitée montre que la consommation 
l’emporte légèrement sur la vente car les 54,32% sont autoconsommés (Tableau III). 
TABLEAU III. REPARTITION PAR DESTINATION. 
Destination C G AF AM Total Pourcentage 
Vente 9 295 8 8 320 44,57 % 
Consommation 21 328 29 12 390 54,32 % 
Don 0 7 1 0 8 1,11 % 
Total 30 630 38 20 718 100 % 
Effectifs cumulés 
Les effectifs élevés recensés lors des descentes, chez les 35 familles, ne reflètent que 
partiellement les résultas totaux. La considération de la partie exploitée en plus du cheptel 
élevé dans le cumul des effectifs fait sortir la totalité des impacts (Tableau III). 
Il ressort du Tableau IV que l’augmentation réalisée en 12 mois s’élève à +146,20 % 
par rapport à l’effectif d’origine. 
TABLEAU IV. EFFECTIF CUMULE DES DEUX ZONES.  
Dates Effectif réel Effectif exploité Effectif cumulé Augmentation 
Déc. 2000 738 - 738 - 
Janv. 2001 661 74 735 - 0,40 % 
Février 606 133 813 + 10,16 % 
Mars 625 66 898 + 21,68 % 
Avril 521 57 851 + 15,31 % 
Mai 596 38 964 + 30,62 % 
Juin 833 31 1232 + 66,93 % 
Juillet 992 36 1427 + 93,36 % 
Août 948 73 1456 + 97,28 % 
Septembre 985 52 1545  + 106,64 % 
Octobre 1038 82 1680  + 127,64 % 
Novembre 1099 76 1817  + 146,20 % 
 
130
 
Mortalité 
Mortalité globale 
En intervenant sur les deux contraintes majeures (MN et parasitoses internes), le taux 
de mortalité totale passe de  38,71% à 21,07%. Cette diminution es t d’ailleurs le reflet des 
résultats obtenus au niveau de chaque classe  : si les taux de mo rtalité s’élèvent à 42,34%, 
33,95% et 31,42% respectivement pour les classes « poussin », « poulette » et « adulte » avant 
interventions, les taux correspondants ne sont  plus que, respectivement de 29,3%, 7,69% et 
7,92%, après interventions (FIG. 5)  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Avant intervention Après intervention
P oussin Poulet Adulte Total
 
FIG. 5. Mortalité totale avant et après interventions 
Mortalité des poussins 
Bien que certains ménages soient victimes de MN (ménage 121 à HB1 et ménage 236 
à Pestavia), les résultats nous m ontrent une forte diminution des contraintes sanitaires liées à 
cette maladie et aux parasitoses internes. Pour cette classe d’âge, le taux de mortalité due à la 
MN est passé de 25,3 % à 4,24 % ; quant aux helmin thes, la part de mortalité attribuable à ces 
parasites a pu être réduite de 38,5 % (taux a nnuel avant interventions) à 10,22 % (taux annuel 
après interventions) (Tableau V). 
TABLEAU V.  COMPARAISON DES MORTALITES DES POUSSINS AVANT ET APRES 
INTERVENTIONS. (DEC.2000 A NOV.2001) 
Mortalités 
Après interventions Avant interventions 
Causes 
nombre % nombre % 
NDV 27 4,2 201 25,3 
Variole aviaire 37 5,8 29 3,6 
Cholera aviaire 0 0 35 4,4 
 Parasitisme 65 10,2 306 38,5 
 Voiture 22 3,5 34 4,3 
 Prédateur 145 22,8 76 9,6 
 Autres 359 53,5 113 14,2 
Total 655 100 794 100 
Taille du cheptel 2234  1875  
 
Il semblerait que la variole a it accentué sa pression en comp arant les taux de mortalité 
respectifs dus à cette virose avant et après les interventions (3,6 % et 5,8 %). En fait, il n’en 
est rien, car, en calculant les pourcentages que représentent les nombres des poussins victimes 
de la variole dans les deux situations, les chiffres obtenus s’élèvent respectivement à 1,8 % 
(avant interventions) et 1,65 % (après interventions), des chiffres quasi-stationnaires. 
131
 
Par contre, on assiste à une relative recrudescence du facteur « prédateur » dont la part 
est non seulement augmentée en terme de pou rcentage par rapport aux mortalités (22,8 % 
contre 9,6 % avant interventions) mais aussi en  terme de proportion par rapport aux effectifs 
totaux des poussins: 76 poussins sont enregistré s victimes de la prédation avant interventions, 
ce qui correspond à 4,1 % du nombre total (76/1875) ; les chiffres correspondants s’élèvent à 
145 poussins représentant 6,5 % de l’effectif des poussins (145/2234) après les interventions. 
(Tableau VI) 
Le facteur «autres» a pris le dessus sur tout es les contraintes en causant la perte de 
plus de 53 % des mortalités. Nous rappelons que ce facteur englobe le piétinement des 
poussins, l’égarement, les intempéries (froid, pl uie, cyclone, etc…), la sous-alimentation, les 
intoxications, divers accidents etc.. 
Mortalité des poulets 
Pour cette classe, une très nette diminution des mortalités a été réalisée : le nombre des 
poulets morts passe de 314 (n=925) à 83 (n=1080) soit une réduction de plus de 73 %  
TABLEAU VI. MORTALITES DES POULETS AVANT ET APRES INTERVENTIONS.  
Mortalités 
Après interventions Avant interventions 
Causes 
nombre % nombre % 
NDV 15 18,07 216 68,80 
Variole aviaire 0 0 0 0 
 Choléra aviaire 1 1,20 15 3,84 
 Parasitisme 1 1,20 18 5,75 
 Voiture 21 25,30 23 7,32 
 Prédateur 11 13,25 15 4,78 
 Autres 34 40,96 27 8,59 
Total 83 100 314 100 
Taille du cheptel (n) 1080  925  
 
L’impact direct sur les maladies ciblées est palpable avec une réduction de l’influence 
de la MN dont la part de  mortalité n’atteint plus que 18,07 % contre 68,80 % avant 
vaccination; il en est de même  des parasitoses internes qui , auparavant étaient reconnus 
comme étant la cause des 5,75 % des mortalités de  la classe poulette contre 1,20 % après les 
traitements (Tableau VII). Ici encore, le facteu r « autres » est responsable des 40 % au moins 
des mortalités recensées. 
Les dégâts causés par les prédateurs et la voiture restent tout de  même stationnaires 
bien que les proportions des victimes correspondantes se trouvent fortement augmentées. 
Mortalité des adultes 
La maîtrise de la maladie de Newcastle est excellente : aucun cas de mortalité n’a été 
non plus rencontré pendant les 12 mois d’intervention (Tableau VII).  
 
132
 
TABLEAU VII.  COMPARAISON DES MORTALITES DES ADULTES AVANT ET APRES 
INTERVENTIONS. (DECEMBRE 2000 A NOVEMBRE 2001) 
Mortalités 
Après interventions Avant interventions 
Causes 
nombre % nombre % 
NDV 0 0 78 75 
Variole aviaire 0 0 0 0 
Cholera aviaire 0 0 4? 3,8 
Parasitisme 0 0 0 0 
Voiture 14 58,3 10 9,6 
Prédateur 1 4,2 1 0,96 
Autres 9 3,5 11 10,6 
Total 24 100 104 100 
Taille du cheptel 303  331  
 
La voiture est devenue le premier facteur de mortalité de cette classe. Ce qui n’était 
pas étonnant car, deux villages sur trois sont traversés par une route goudronnée dans la zone 
2.  
Résultat économique 
Sans interventions, chaque ménage gagne annuellement l’équivalent d’une somme 
égale à 12,68 US$. Ce revenu s’est élevé à 33,01 US$ l’année (revenu brut), suite à la 
vaccination anti-maladie de Newcastle et au dé parasitage des poussins sous mère (Tableau 
VIII). 
TABLEAU VIII. RESULTATS D’EXPLOITATION AVANT ET APRES INTERVENTIONS. 
Valeur totale Revient par Famille Période Nombre de 
volailles 
exploitées 
En FMG* En US$ Nbre de 
têtes 
En FMG En US$ 
Avant 
interventions 
231 2.474.000 380,62 7,7 82.466 12,68 
Après 
interventions 
718 7.510.000 1155,38 20,5 214.571 33,01 
* : FMG : franc malgache garanti (monnaie locale) 
Le tableau financier a fait sortir de s bénéfices égaux à 18,33 US$ et un rapport 
bénéfice sur charges ( return ) égal à 9,16 (Tableau IX).  
TABLEAU IX.  RESULTAT FINANCIER DE L’EXPLOITATION APRES 12 MOIS 
D’INTERVENTION. (PAR FAMILLE) 
REVENUS TIRES DE L’EXPLOITATION (US$) CHARGES (US$) 
Après 
interventions 
33,01 Coût du vaccin 1,32 
Frais divers 0,32 
COÛT DE LA 
PARIE 
EXPLOITEE Avant 
interventions 
12,68 
Médicament anti- 
parasitaire 
0,35 
DIFFERENCE 20,33 Charges totales 2,00 
BENEFICE 18,33 
BENEFICE/CHARGES (Return) 9,16 
 
133
 
DISCUSSION  
En intervenant sur les contra intes sanitaires majeures, à savoir la pseudo-peste aviaire 
et les parasitoses internes des poussins, la produ ctivité extrinsèque de l’aviculture villageoise 
s’est trouvée fortement améliorée par rapport à la situation du départ. En effet, en mesurant 
les impacts de cette intervention en utilisant comme critères la variation du cheptel élevé, le 
taux d’exploitation et le taux de mortalité, les résultats obtenus se sont montrés positifs. 
Concernant le cheptel élevé, une augmentation d’environ +49% a été réalisée pour une 
période d’une année. Ce résultat semblait être relativement modeste, en la comparant avec 
celle réalisée par Alders en 2002 au Mozambique  (+140% l’année) avec la seule vaccination 
anti-Newcastle [3].  
En se référant sur la partie exploitée, le chiffre correspondant, ramené par ménage, a 
connu une augmentation spectaculaire car elle est passée de 7,7 volailles par ménage au début 
des interventions à 20,5 à la fin du suivi, soit une  hausse de plus de 166%. Cette hausse très 
importante du taux d’exploitati on expliquerait la différence entre nos résultats et ceux de 
Alders et coll. où le taux correspondant ne dépa sserait pas les 10%. La stagnation relative du 
cheptel élevé a été sûrement liée à cette condu ite choisie par les ména ges ; une conduite qui 
avait comme avantage d’éviter le dépassement  rapide de la capacité de charge de 
l’environnement réservé au cheptel de chaque  ménage en retardant la surpopulation. Un 
deuxième avantage consistait à favoriser les revenus tirés de l’exploitation ou à améliorer 
quotidiennement l’alimentation du ménage, étant donné que les produits restaient disponibles 
tout au long de l’année. Ce mode d’exploitation pourrait être pris comme modèle de départ en 
attendant la résolution des facteurs autres que les contraintes sanitaires. 
Si l’on comparait le nombre de volailles exploitées avec le cheptel du départ, il 
représentait plus de 97% du cheptel initial. Ce fort taux d’exploitation ne concernait pas 
uniquement le cas de Madagascar : un chiffr e sensiblement identi que a été rapporté par 
Mopate et ses collaborateurs en 1997 au Tchad 
[4]. Le même comportement des villageois 
vis-à-vis de l’exploitation de leurs volailles se rencontrait dans plusieurs autres pays 
d’Afrique comme en Centre Afrique [5], au Tchad [6], en Ethiopie [7], au Togo [8], au Mali 
[9]. 
Une répartition par classe d’appartenance de la partie exploitée a mis en évidence que 
le poulet constituait le pr incipal produit de l’aviculture villageoise : plus de 87% du total sont 
issus de cette classe « poulette ». La répar tition des volailles d’exploitation par destination a 
fait apparaître que les ménages préféraient un peu plus consommer (54,32%) que de vendre 
(44,57%) leurs produits. En réalité, la tendance dépend de la situa tion de nécessités des 
ménages. Ainsi, lors du précédent suivi, la destination a été en faveur de la vente [10]. 
Dans l’ensemble, la pression des contraintes sanitaires ciblées a fortement diminué. La 
baisse du nombre des victimes des deux maladies constituait un indice sérieux en faveur de 
l’efficacité des interventions. En considérant l’ensemble du cheptel, 5,5 % des mortalités 
totales (42/762) sont dues à la MN. L’incidence de cette maladie n’atteint plus que 1,2 % des 
effectifs totaux (toutes classes confondues). Ces victimes ont permis de prouver le passage de 
la maladie et le taux de prévalence obtenu relativement bas constituait une preuve 
supplémentaire de l’efficacité des vaccins utilisés [11,12,13,14].  
Le choix d’un mode de vaccination n’a jamais été chose facile[4]. L’échec survenu 
chez les deux ménages, l’un à vaccin HB1 (l e ménage 121), l’autre à vaccin Pestavia (le 
ménage 236) a démontré la particularité du milie u dans lequel évol uent les volailles 
134
 
villageoises et aussi la complexité du système et la difficulté dans l’adéquation du calendrier 
de vaccination en utilisant des vaccins anti-Newcastle à souches thermosensibles. 
Pour le cas du ménage 121, la défaillance apparente du vaccin HB1 dans son élevage 
n’a pas été tellement surprenante, vu ses absences fréquentes et son irrégularité dans le suivi 
de ses volailles. Il est à peu pr ès certain qu’une partie de son cheptel ne soit pas vaccinée ou 
du moins mal vaccinée, si bien que l’élevage n’a pas été protégé.  
Quant au ménage 236, il est régulier et Fi g. parmi ceux ayant acquis les meilleurs 
succès avec un cheptel avoisinant la centaine, renfermant une vingtaine de femelles adultes. 
L’introduction de la MN provoqua nt uniquement la mortalité des poussins et des poulettes 
signifierait que les vaccinations durant les descentes successives deux ou trois mois 
auparavant n’ont pas fait de prise. Les vacci ns utilisés à ces occasi ons étaient probablement 
inactivés. La cause de cette inactivation n’a pa s été connue de façon précise mais, un défaut 
de chaîne de froid a été fortement suspecté. En  effet, cette période a coïncidé justement au 
moment où le « thermocooler » n’était pas disponible et à la place, une simple glacière a été 
utilisée.  
La réduction de l’incidence des maladies parasitaires a été également remarquable 
chez les classes vulnérables (poussin/poulette ), surtout à partir du moment où nous avons 
confié le calendrier de tra itement aux ménages eux-mêmes.  Ce résultat prouve qu’il est 
possible de maîtriser les parasitoses, du moins à court terme, grâce à l’utilisation des 
médicaments appropriés. Le prot ocole mérite toutefois d’être  affiné, car le traitement 
systématique que nous avons conçu pourrait abou tir et même favoriser l’accoutumance de la 
population parasitaire vis à vis des produits utilisés.  
L’existence d’une parasitose résiduelle chez les 10% victimes serait probablement le 
résultat de l’inadéqua tion du protocole d’utilisation des deux produits (un protocole conçu 
pour un traitement strictement préventif). En effet, le déparasitage a été réalisé en coïncidence 
avec les descentes, autrement dit, à des intervalles réguliers d’une fois par mois. 
Malheureusement, les éclosions des poussins ne suivaient pas cette régularité : elles pouvaient 
arriver à tout moment, en particulier le le ndemain ou les quelques jours qui suivent notre 
passage. Entre temps, les couvées correspondantes  se sont, non seulement infestées mais, se 
trouvaient déjà malades avant de recevoir leur premier traitement préventif. Par conséquent, il 
convient de réajuster le protocole de déparasitage, non plus en fonction des descentes mais, en 
fonction de l’éclosion des poussins. 
La vaccination anti-Newcastle et le déparasitage interne des poussins ont amélioré de 
façon substantielle la productivité de l’aviculture villageoise. Les interventions effectuées ont 
engendré des bénéfices égaux à 9 fois la valeur des dépenses engagées, résultats similaires à 
ceux obtenus par BELL au Cameroun avec la seule vaccination anti-maladie de Newcastle 
[15]. Les revenus ménagers ont été multipliés par 2 fois et demie en 12 mois d’interventions. 
Nous signalons, toutefois, que la répartition de ces bénéfices n’est pas uniforme tout au long 
de l’année : elle varie en fonction des période s. L’aviculture villageoise est une activité 
rentable. Toutefois, il faudrait tenir compte des facteurs, autres que ceux d’ordre sanitaire, 
pour un meilleur résultat. 
REMERCIEMENTS 
Les auteurs remercient viveme nt le FOFIFA-DRZV pour la logistique et surtout le 
parrainage qu’il a bien voulu apporter au Projet MAG 10 185. 
135
 
Les plus vifs remerciements sont égal ement adressés à la division conjointe 
FAO/AIEA, Agence Internationale de l’Ener gie Atomique (AIEA) pour avoir financé ce 
projet combien important pour l’Economie Rurale des pays africains. 
REFERENCES 
[1] FAO, Projet d’appui aux groupements fémin ins pour le développeme nt de l’aviculture 
villageoise dans le Sud malgache. Rapport final (1998)10pp. 
[2] KOKO, MAMINIAINA, O. F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S. J., 
Aviculture villageoise à Ma dagascar : productivité et s ituation épidémiologique. In: 
Characterstics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa (2002) 47-63. 
[3] ALDERS, R., FRINGE, R., MATA, B.V., Experiences in the control of Newcastle disease 
in Mozambique. In: Characterstics and pa rameters of family poultry production in 
Africa (2002) 159-166. 
[4] MOPATE, L.Y., IMADINE, M. ET BECHIR, M., Typologie fonctionnelle des élevages 
bovins, ovins, caprins et volailles du No rd-Guéra. Rapport technique, Service 
Epidémiologie, Laboratoire de Farcha (1994). 
[5] PROVOST, A., ET BOREDON, C., Utilisation en Afrique Centrale d'un vaccin aviaire 
polyvalent. Rev Elev.Méd. Vét. Pays Trop. 21 (2) (1968) 165–179. 
[6] IEMVT, Situation actuelle et possibilité de  développement de l'aviculture en République 
du  Tchad. Rapport de mission (1978) 106 p. 
[7] ALAMARGOT, J., AKLILU, M., FOSSEHA, G., Pathologie aviaire en Ethiopie, examen 
de 198 nécropsies effectuées en 1983-1984 à la  Faculté de Médecine de Debre-Zeit. 
Rev. Elev. Méd. Vét. Pays Trop. 38 (2) (1985) 130-137. 
[8] GRUNDLER, G., SCHMIDT, M., ET DJABAKOU, K., Sérologie de la maladie de 
Newcastle et de salmonellose (S. gallinarum) chez les volailles des petits exploitants 
paysans au Togo. Rev. Elev. Méd. Vét. Pays Trop. 41 (4) (1988) 327-328. 
[9] RIGAUT, M., Une expérience d'intensification de l'aviculture villageoise en région de 
Ségou, République du Mali. Thèse de Doctor at Vétérinaire (ALFORT), Paris (1989) 
361 p. 
[10] KOKO, MAMINIAINA, O. F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S. J., 
Impact du déparasitage des poussins et d’ une vaccination anti-Newcastle et anti- 
pasteurellique aviaire sur la productivité de l’aviculture villageoise malgache. Rapport 
intermédiaire (2000) (non publié) 
[11] IEMVT (1989). Développement de l’aviculture traditionnelle en Afrique tropicale. Fiche 
technique d’Elevage tropical. Ministère de la coopération et du Développement, 8pp. 
[12] VERMEYLEN, A. ET DEMEY, F. 1988. Prophylaxie des maladies virales, aviaires sous 
les tropiques. Tropicultura, 6 : 91–98. 
[13] DJIMI, E. 1996. Contribution à l’étude de l’ évaluation de l’efficacité de la protection 
vaccinale et vérification de l’effet positif du déparasitage sur les réponse immunitaire 
en aviculture traditionnelle dans la région de Kaolack et Fatick (Sénégal). Thèse. Méd. 
Vét., Université de Dakar, 76 p. 
[14] ALDERS, R., SPRADBROW, P., Newcastle disease in village chickens. SADC planning 
workshop on Newcastle disease control in  village chickens, 6–9 March, Maputo – 
Mozambique (2000) 45 pp. 
[15] BELL, J. G., FOTZO, T. M., AMARA, A., AGBEDE, G., Dynamique de la volaille 
villageoise dans la région de Dschang, Cameroun. In: Issues in family poultry research 
and development. Proceedings INFPD workshop, M’Bour, Sénégal (2000) 96–101. 
 
 
136
 
AVICULTURE VILLAGEOISE A MADAGASCAR: PRODUCTIVITE ET 
PERFORMANCE DE CROISSANCE 
M. KOKO1, O.F. MAMINIAINA1, J. RAVAOMANANA2, 
S.J. RAKOTONINDRINA2 
1Institut Malgache des Vaccins Vétérinaires, Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
2Département de Recherches Zootechniques et Vétérinaires, FOFIFA, Ministère de 
l’Education Nationale et de la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
Résumé 
Les investigations complémentaires visant à confirmer et compléter les résultats socio-
économiques et épidémiologiques de 1999-2000 ont été également orientées vers les études des 
paramètres de productivité. Dans l’ensemble, les valeurs déjà publiées ont été retrouvées à savoir, la 
production annuelle d’œufs de la poule de race locale, le nombre d’œufs disponible pour la 
consommation-vente, le nombre de couvées par an et le taux d’éclosion. D’autres paramètres ont été 
mesurés. Le rythme de ponte, par exemple, a été de « un œuf toutes les 36 heures » et la durée 
moyenne d’élevage d’une couvée par leur mère, de 3 mois environ (87 j). Le cycle de reproduction 
s’élevait a 126j. Enfin, les mesures pondérales ont donné des valeurs moyennes de 47g, 1,620 kg et 
2,460 kg pour l’œuf, la poule et le coq de race locale respectivement. La vitesse de croissance des 
poussins reste très variable.  
Abstract 
VILLAGE POULTRY IN MADAGASCAR: PRODUCTIVITY AND PERFORMANCE OF 
GROWTH.  
Complementary investigations on productivity parameters were carried out on 1999-2000, to 
confirm and complet the socio-economic and epidemiological results. Overall, the values for the 
annual production of eggs, the number available for consumption and sale, the number incubated and 
the hatchability rate agreed with already published results. Other parameters were mesured. One egg 
was laid every 36 hours and the average duration of rearing of a clutch of chicks was 87 days. The 
reproduction cycle was 126 days. Finally, the average weight of eggs, hens and cocks were 47g, 1.62 
kg and 2.46 kg respectively. The rate of growth of chicks was very variable. 
INTRODUCTION 
La volaille est actuellement la  plus importante ressource an imale dans le monde où le 
cheptel aviaire a été estimé en l’an 2000, à quel ques 14 milliards de têtes,  selon la FAO. La 
production d’œufs et de viande de volaille occupe plus de 30%  de la totalité  des protéines 
animales consommées, et cette part ne cesse de  croître [1]. Dans la plupart des pays en 
développement, plus de 80% du ch eptel aviaire évolue dans le  sou-secteur traditionnel. La 
poule de race locale, élevée en liberté constitue la principale espèce exploitée. 
Les enquêtes socio-économiques et épidémiologiques menées en 1999-2000 dans 
deux zones écologiques (Ambohimangakely et Moramanga) sur l’aviculture villageoise ont 
permis de connaître quelques pa ramètres de performance et de productivité de la poule 
indigène malgache. Les résultats obtenus ont  précisé que la poule locale pond annuellement 
une trentaine d’œufs en 3 couvées, à raison de 12 œufs par couvée. La taille du cheptel aviaire 
familial s’élevait à 11 têtes [2, 3, 4]. 
137
 
Les investigations ont été poursuivies afin d’apporter des précisions complémentaires 
sur les chiffres déjà publiés tout  en apportant les valeurs corr espondant à d’autres paramètres 
de productivité. Ces paramètres concernent le poids des adultes, le poids des œufs, le cycle de 
production de la poule, la performance de croissance des poussins et des poulets, etc…  
La connaissance de la performance de productivité et de croissance de la poule de race 
locale constitue un élément important pour l’él aboration d’un programme d’amélioration du 
système, en vue de lui donner une place dans le développement du secteur rural. 
MATERIEL ET METHODES 
Les zones d’étude, la méthodologie et les prot ocoles suivis étaient les mêmes que ceux de 
l’enquête socio-économique [2] à savoir : visites périodiques, enregistrement sur des fiches et 
carnets de tous les évènements zoo-sanitaires (p roduction d’œufs et de poussins, mortalité, 
exploitation). En ce qui concerne la croissa nce des poussins, des pe sées mensuelles nous 
permettaient de relever, au fur et à mesure leurs poids. 
RESULTATS 
Les résultats et données obtenus provie nnent des mêmes fa milles étudiées (33) 
réparties entre les deux zones. 
Production d’oeufs 
Durant les deux saisons (une saison sèche, du mois de mai 1999 au mois octobre 1999 
et une saison humide, du mois de Novembre 1999 au mois de mai 2000),  2987 œufs ont été 
enregistrés pour 256 couvées. Sur la totalité, 2237 œufs ont été incubés et les 750 œufs 
restants étaient soit consommés soit vendus par les ménages suivis. Pa rmi les incubés ; 2023 
œufs ont donné 1590 poussins (Tableau 1). 
A partir de cette producti on totale, nous avons calculé la productivité moyenne d’une 
poule villageoise en terme de nombre d’œufs pa r couvée ou de couvées par poule ainsi que la 
production annuelle d’œufs par poule (Tableau 3). 
TABLEAU I. PRODUCTION D’ŒUFS ET LEUR UTILISATION. 
Oeufs Saison Zone Nombre de 
menages 
Nombre 
de poules
Nombre 
de 
couvees 
 
Produits 
Oeufs 
Incubes* 
Oeufs 
Eclos 
Disp. 
Vente 
 
1 
 
12 
 
34 
 
45 
 
587/551 
 
457/399 
 
327 
 
130 
2 18 51 79 929/874 730/693 584 199 
Sèche 
Mai à 
Octobre 
1999 1+2 
 
30 85 124 1516/1425 1187/1092 911 329 
1 12 39 54 655 450/385 276 205 
2 18 57 78 816 600/546 403 216 
Humide 
Nov.1999 
à Mai 2000 1+2 30 96 132 1471 1050/931 679 421 
Annuelle 1+2 30 - 256 2987/2896 2237/2023 1590 750 
* : numérateur : nombre total d’œufs incubés ; dénominateur : nombre d’œufs parmi les incubés ayant donné des 
poussins 
 
138
 
TABLEAU II. PRODUCTION D’ŒUFS PAR POULE ET PAR COUVEE. 
OEUFS  
SAISON 
 
ZONE Par poule Par couvée 
Nombre de 
couvées par 
poule 
1 17,26 13,04 1,32 
2 18,21 11,75 1,54 
 
Sèche 
(5 mois) 1+2 17,83 12,22 1,47 
 
1 
 
16,79 
 
12,12 
 
1,36 
2 14,31 10,46 1,37 
 
Humide 
(7 mois) 
1+2 15,32 11,14 1,37 
TABLEAU III. PRODUCTION ANNUELLE D’ŒUFS PAR POULE. 
SAISON ZONE ŒUFS PAR POULE NOMBRE DE 
COUVEES 
Sèche 1 17,83 1,475 
Humide 2 15,32 1,37 
Annuelle 1+2 33,15 2,84 
 
La production moyenne par poule est de 17,83 œufs en 1,47 couvées soit 12,22 œufs 
par couvée (saison sèche) et de 15,32 œufs en 1,37 couvées soit 11,14 œufs par couvée 
(saison humide); ce qui donne une moyenne géné rale de 11,7 œufs par poule et par couvée 
(Tableaux 2, 3 et 4, Fig. 1). 
Par conséquent, une poule donne annuellement 33 œufs en 2,84 couvées (Tableau III). 
Il est à remarquer que, environ 54% de la to talité des œufs sont produits pendant les 5 
mois de saison sèche (juin à octobre) et que la production est certainem ent minimale car elle 
englobe en même temps celle de la nouvelle généra tion de poules survenues au cours de 
l’année. 
Les œufs sont utilisés soit pour la cons ommation / vente soit pour la production de 
poussins (Tableau IV, Fig.1). 
Taux d'éclosion: 78,6 % 
139
 
 
 
FIG. 1. Productivité moyenne par couvée de la poule villageoise malgache (zones 1et 2, projet MAG 
10 185, 1999–2000) 
TABLEAU IV. ŒUFS DISPONIBLES POUR CONSOMMATION/VENTE. 
ŒUFS  
SAISON Par couvée Disponibles/couv
ée 
Pourcentage/couv
ée 
Sèche 2,22 2 ,65 21,68% 
Humide 11,14 3,18 28,54% 
Moyenne annuelle 11,66 2,92 25,04% 
 
Une moyenne de 2,92 œufs par couvée soit 25% est réservée à la 
consommation/vente, ce qui correspond à environ 8 œufs par poule par an.  
Le nombre d’œufs consommés / vendus par le s ménages suivis es t légèrement plus 
élevé pendant la saison humide comparé à celui de la saison sèche (Tableau IV). 
Fertilité des œufs de poule de race locale 
A partir des œufs incubés pe ndant les douze mois de suivi, nous avons pu calculé le 
taux d’éclosion moyen des œufs de poule locale dans les deux zones d’étude.  
Mortalité 
42,3 % 
12 œufs  
œufs
Disponible 
3 œufs 
9 œufs 
7 Poussins 
 
4 poulets  
Prédateurs:  
*Rapaces 
*Rats 
*Carnivores 
*Voiture 
MALADIES 
PARASITAIRES 
Maladies infectieuses 
 *ND 
*variole 
*Choléra aviaire
Taux 
d'éclosion: 
78,6 % 
140
 
TABLEAU V. UTILISATION DES ŒUFS POUR LA PRODUCTION DES POUSSINS. 
OEUFS  Poussins éclos 
par couvée 
Taux 
d’éclosion 
 
SAISON 
Par couvée Incubés par couvée   
Sèche 12,22 9,57 78,3% 7,98 83,42% 
Humide 11,14 7,95 71,36% 5,79 72,93% 
Moyenne annuelle 11,66 8,73 74,87% 6,86 78,59% 
 
Les œufs sont surtout destinés à la ré génération du cheptel : 75% environ de la 
production totale d’œufs sont utilisés pour la  production des poussins. Au bout d’une année 
d’étude, le taux moyen d’éclosion observé est de 78,6% (Tableau V). Il est à remarquer qu’il 
existe une variation de ce taux au cours des saisons. Cette variation semble être en faveur de 
la saison sèche. 
Cycle de reproduction de la poule villageoise 
La productivité de la poule villageoise es t également caractérisée par son cycle de 
reproduction qui comprend 3 phases: 
• la ponte (avec son rythme) 
• l’incubation et  
• l’élevage des poussins. 
Pour connaître la durée moyenne de ponte d’une poule villageoise, nous avons pu 
suivre 70 couvées. De ces couvées, nous avons  pu calculer qu’une poule a besoin de 17,47 
jours pour donner les 11,87 œufs d’une couvée; ce qui signifie, un œuf tous les 1,47 jours 
(Tableau VI). 
TABLEAU VI. RYTHME DE PONTE. 
ZONE Nombre de 
couvees 
suivies 
Nombre 
total 
d’oeufs 
Duree d’une 
ponte 
(en jours) 
Nombre d’œufs 
cal-cule/couvee
Rythme de 
ponte 
(en jours) 
1 30 371 18,53 (± 6,20) 12,37( ± 3,37) 1,51( ± 0,40) 
2 40 460 16,68(± 6,05) 11,50( ± 3,35) 1,47( ± 0,40) 
1+2 70 831 17,47(± 6,10) 11,87( ± 3,34) 1,47( ± 0,39) 
 
En utilisant la même méthode, en suivant 28  portées, la durée moyenne d’élevage des 
poussins par leur mère est de 87 jours (Tableau VII). 
TABLEAU VII. DUREE D’ELEVAGE DES POUSSINS PAR LA MERE. 
ZONE MOYENNE (en jours) 
1    (n=12) 83,08  (± 10,53) 
2    (n=16) 90,36  (± 26,78) 
1+2  (n=28) 87,00  (± 20,87) 
 
141
 
TABLEAU VIII. CYCLE DE REPRODUCTION DE LA POULE DE RACE LOCALE. 
Zone Durée de 
ponte(j) 
Durée 
d’incubation(j) 
Durée d’élevage 
des poussins(j) 
Cycle de 
production(j)
Nombre de 
couvées/an 
1 18,53 21 83,08 122,61 2,97 
2 16,68 21 90,36 127,98 2,85 
1+2 17,47 21 87,00 125,47 2,9 
(j : jours) 
Connaissant la durée de ponte et celle de l’élevage des poussins par leur mère, nous 
avons pu calculer le cycle de reproduction de  la poule de race locale malgache qui est 
d’environ 126 jours (125,47j). Par conséque nt, la poule malgache  donne annuellement 2,9 
couvées (Tableau VIII), chiffre que l’on peut arrondir à 3 couvées par an. Ce qui confirme les 
résultats du suivi (2,84 ≈ 3). 
Poids de l’œuf de poule villageoise 
Après la mesure des différents paramètres de productivité de l’aviculture villageoise, 
nous avons également mesuré le poids des œufs de poule de race locale. 
Comme résultat, un œuf pèse en moyenne 47 g. Signalons que les œufs de première 
couvée issus des poules à la première ponte s ont plus légers avec un poids moyen de 44 g 
(Tableau IX). 
TABLEAU IX. POIDS MOYEN D’UN ŒUF DE POULE DE RACE LOCALE. 
Mère Poule Poids d’un œuf (en g) 
Au moins deux couvées (n=166) 47,84  (± 5,76) 
Première couvée (n=42) 43,62  (± 5,27) 
Sans distinction  (n=208) 46,99  (± 5,90) 
Comparaison de la poule villageoise malgache avec ses voisines africaines 
Globalement, les paramè tres de productivité de la poule villageoise malgache sont 
dans les limites africaines (Tableau X).  
TABLEAU X. PLACE DE LA RACE LOCALE MALGACHE AU NIVEAU AFRICAIN 
PAYS COUVEES 
PAR AN 
ŒUFS 
PAR 
COUVEE 
POIDS 
D’UN ŒUF 
(g) 
TAUX 
D’ECLOSIO
N 
Ethiopie [5] - - 44-49 39-42 
Burkina Faso [6] 2,7-3,0 12-18 30-40 60-90 
Tanzanie [7] - 6-20 41 50-100 
Ghana [8] 2,5 10 - 72 
Mali [9] 2,1 8,8 34,4 69,1 
Soudan [10] 4,5 10,87 40,6 90 
Madagascar 
(Projet MAG 10 185) 
2,84 
(n=256) 
11,66 
(n=256) 
46,99 
(n=208) 
78,6 
(n=256) 
 
142
 
Performance de croissance du poulet villageois 
Période sous mère 
Les poussins à l’éclosion pèsent en moyenne 31 g. Après trois mois, âge de séparation 
de la mère, ils pèsent environ 500 g d’où un gain moyen quotidien (GMQ) de 5,55 g. Lors des 
21 premiers jours, la pente de la courbe de cr oissance est très faible, le GMQ n’est seulement 
que de 2,61 g. Par contre, pendant les 69 derniers jours, le gain de poids quotidien est de 6,00 
g (Fig.2). 
0, 00
100,00
200,00
300,00
400,00
500,00
600,00
Ec 0,10 0,23 0,27 0,37 0,47 0,53 0,70 1,03 1,20 1,50 1,87 2,13 2,30 2,47 2,57 3,20
A ge (en mo is)
 
FIG.2. Mesures pondérales de croissance (Période sous-mère poule) 
 Période après séparation 
A 7 mois d’âge, les poulets pèsent en mo yenne 1500 grammes ; d’où un gain moyen 
quotidien de 7,14 g. Si l’on considère uniquement les 4 derniers mois ap rès la séparation de 
leur mère, le GMQ est de 8,33 g (Fig.3).  
0,00
200,00
400,00
600,00
800,00
1 000,00
1 200,00
1 400,00
1 600,00
1 800,00
Ec 0,10 0,23 0,27 0,37 0,47 0,53 0,70 1,03 1,20 1,50 1,87 2,13 2,30 2,47 2,57 3,20 3,67 4,30 4,93 5,57 6,20 6,83 7,00 7,47 8,33
Age (en m ois)
Poids (en g)n
 
FIG.3. Mesures pondérales de croissance (jusqu’à sept mois d’âge) 
Ces résultats s’expliqueraient par l’évolution de la capacité des poussins qui arrivent à 
se débrouiller de mieux en mieux en fonction de l’âge. Il faudrait également tenir compte de 
l’effet du groupe mère / poussins. En effet, à l’âge de séparation de leur mère, les poulets sont 
aptes à se débrouiller tout seul et trouvent plus de nourriture en évoluant chacun de son coté. 
Poids des adultes 
En ce qui concerne les adultes, le coq lo cal pèse en moyenne 2,460 kg, tandis que la 
poule 1,620 kg. Cependant, les rele vés de poids que nous avons effectués, montrent qu’il y a 
des spécimens allant de 600 g jusqu’à 2,450 kg pour les poules et 1,700 kg jusqu’à 4,010 kg 
chez les coqs; ce qui démontre une grande variabilité due probablement à l’existence des 
écotypes. 
143
 
DISCUSSION 
Les paramètres de producti on de la poule villageoise malgache que nous avions 
découverts lors de l’enquête socio-économique et épidémiologique ont été confirmés dans 
l’ensemble. Ce travail nous pe rmettait de compléter nos étude s sur d’autres critères. Les 
valeurs trouvées cadrent bien dans les limites africaines. Le nombre d’œufs moyen par 
couvée, le rythme de ponte, le nombre de couvé e par poule et par an, le taux d’éclosion, l’âge 
de séparation des poussins de leur s mères, la croissance des poussins et poulettes, le cycle de 
reproduction, le poids d’un œuf, le  poids des adultes sont prati quement les mêmes [1, 2, 3, 4, 
11, 12]. 
L’hétérogénéité des adultes du point de vue poids, serait un indice en faveur de 
l’existence des écotypes [11], ce qui suppose une grande variabilité génétique de la race locale 
et par conséquent, des performances génétiques variées dont l’étude constitue certainement un 
axe de recherche incontournable pour l’amélioration de ce sous-secteur avicole traditionnel.  
REMERCIEMENTS 
Les auteurs remercient vivement la division conjointe FAO/AIEA, Agence 
Internationale de l’Energie Atomique (AIEA) pour avoir financé ce pr ojet combien important 
pour l’Economie Rurale des pays africains. 
Les plus vifs remerciements sont égal ement adressés au FOFIFA-DRZV pour la 
logistique et surtout le parrainage qu’il a bien voulu apporter au Projet. 
REFERENCES 
[1] PERMIN, A., PEDERSEN, G., Problems rela ted to poultry production at village level. 
roceedings of the Worshop on the Possibilitie s for Smallholder Poultry Projects in 
Eastern and Southern Africa, Morogoro, Tanzania, 22-25 May 2000, p:65-69 
[2] KOKO, M., MAMINIAINA O.F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA S.J., 
Aviculture villageoise à Madagascar : pr oductivité et situation épidémiologique. In 
Characteristics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa, (2002) p: 47-63 
[3] GOODGER, W.J., BENNETT, T.B., DWINGER, R.H., Comparative analysis if family 
poultry production in twelve African countries . In Characteristics and parameters of 
family poultry production in Africa, (2002)143-146. 
[4] EKUE, F.N., PONE, K.D., MAFENI, M.J., NFI, A.N, NJOYA, J., Survey of the 
traditional poultry production system in the Bamenda area, Cameroon. In 
Characteristics and parameters of family poultry production in Africa, (2002)15-25. 
[5] Shanawany and Banerjee., Indigenous chic ken genotypes of Ethiopia. Animal genetic 
Resources Information, 8 (1991) 84–88. 
[6] Bourzat and Sauders. Impr ovement of traditional met hods of poultry production In 
proceeding, CTA seminar, 3rd Internati onal symposium on poultry production in hot 
climates, Hameln Germany, 12 june 1987 Burkina Faso (1990). 
[7] Minga, Katule, Maeda and Musasa., Potential a nd problems of the traditional chicken 
industry in Tanzania.In proceedings of the Ta nzania Veterinary Association Scientific 
(1989). 
[8] Van Veluw., Traditional poultry keeping in Nothern Ghana. ILEIA - December 1987 Vol. 
3, N° 4 (1987) 12 -13. 
[9] Wilson R. T., TRAORE A., KUIT H. G. SLINGERLAND M., Chick mortality in 
scavenging village chickens in Srilanka. Tropical Animal Health Production. 19 (1987) 
229 –236. 
144
 
[10] Wilson R T., Studies on the livestock of  southern Darfus, SudanVII. Pruduction of 
poultry under simulated traditional conditions. Tropical Animal Health Production, 11 
(1979)143–150. 
[11] MINGA, U.M., YONGOLO, M.G.S., MTAMBO, M.M.A., MUTAYOBA, S.K., 
LAWRENCE, P., MWALUSANYA, N.A., KATULE, A., and MLOZI, M.R.S., The 
potential for rural poultry production and health in Africa. Proceedings of the 
Worshop on the Possibilities for Smallholder P oultry Projects in Eastern and Southern 
Africa, Morogoro, Tanzania, 22-25 May (2000) 83-94. 
145
 
IMPACTS DE L’AMELIORATION DE CONDUITE SUR LA 
PRODUCTIVITE DE L’AVICULTURE VILLAGEOISE A MADAGASCAR  
M. KOKO1, O.F. MAMINIAINA1, J. RAVAOMANANA2, S.J. 
RAKOTONINDRINA2 
1Institut Malgache des Vaccins Vétérinaires, Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
2Département de Recherches Zootechniques et Vétérinaires, FOFIFA, Ministère de 
l’Education Nationale et de la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
Résumé 
Pour améliorer les impacts de la vaccination anti-maladie de Newcastle et le traitement anti-
parasitaire des poussins sur la productivité de l’aviculture villageoise, une complémentation 
alimentaire des poussins sous mère et une vulgarisation d’abri ont été rajoutées durant les années 2002 
à 2004. En ce qui concerne les abris, seules des améliorations étaient possibles, la construction d’un 
nouvel abri indépendant des habitations humaines étant fortement handicapée par la situation 
d’insécurité en milieu rural. Quant aux effets de la complémentation alimentaire, ils sont perceptibles 
beaucoup plus en terme de stabilité du gain moyen quotidien (GMQ) que de vitesse de croissance. Le 
taux de mortalité globale reste inchangé, conformément à l’intervention sanitaire seule. L’analyse 
économique de cette deuxième intervention a donné un rapport bénéfice sur charges égal à 3,2 
indiquant que les dépenses occasionnées par la vaccination et le déparasitage des poussins couplés à la 
complémentation alimentaire et à la construction d’abri génèrent des bénéfices égaux à 3 fois sa 
valeur.  
Abstract 
IMPACT OF IMPROVED PRACTICES ON THE PRODUCTIVITY OF VILLAGE POULTRY 
FARMING IN MADAGASCAR. 
 To improve the impact of vaccination against Newcastle disease and anti parasite treatment of 
chicks on the productivity of village poultry production, additional feed was given to chicks with their 
mother and a simple shelter was added during the years from 2002 to 2004. Regarding the shelters, 
only improvements were possible given that the construction of a new shelter away from human 
habitation was strongly contraindicated by the rural security situation. As for the effects of 
supplementary feed, they are much more noticeable as stability of the daily mean weight gain rather 
than growth rate. The economic analysis of this second intervention gave a benefit cost ratio of 3.2, 
indicating that the cost of vaccination and parasite treatment coupled with supplementary feeding and 
the construction of shelter gave a benefit equal to three times its value. 
INTRODUCTION 
La maîtrise des principales contraintes sanitaires obtenue pendant la première phase de 
nos interventions a permis de réduire très nettement la mortalité chez toutes les classes d’âge. 
Il en résulte une augmentation du cheptel élevé et en particulier de l’effectif exploité. 
Toutefois, une mortalité résiduelle relativement importante demeure constatée en particulier 
chez les poussins où l’on enregistre encore annuellement quelque 29,3 % de pertes jusqu’à 
l’âge de séparation de la mère [1]. Cette persistance de mortalité sous-entend la présence des 
facteurs, autres que les contrainte s sanitaires [2, 3, 4]. En effet,  la multiplicité des contraintes 
est une des caractéristiques fondamentales de  l’aviculture traditi onnelle dans les pays 
africains [5]. En dehors des pathologies diverses, le mode d’élevage constitue également un 
facteur limitant non négligeable de la productivité de  l’aviculture villageoise. L’absence 
d’abri, par exemple, expose les volailles à la merci des prédateurs [6], des intempéries, etc. 
146
 
alors que la capacité limitée de la nature en ressources alimentaires entraîne des carences 
chroniques en éléments nutritifs aboutissant ains i à des retards de croissance considérables et 
même à des mortalités chez les classes les plus vulnérables [7, 8, 9]. 
La deuxième phase d’interven tion se propose de vulgariser la construction d’abri au 
niveau de chaque ménage et d’apporter une complémentation alimentaire uniquement aux 
poussins sous mère. 
MATERIEL ET METHODES 
Zones d’étude et action sanitaire 
Les zones, les villages et le s ménages dans lesquels a été menée l’expérimentation, 
sont globalement les mêmes que ceux des interventions antérieures [1]. La vaccination anti-
maladie de Newcastle et le déparasitage des pou ssins sous mère sont continués et appliqués 
selon le protocole de la première intervention [10]. 
Construction d’abris 
L’objectif consiste à construire des abris simples, économiques en utilisant des 
matériaux locaux afin de préserver l’hygiène dans  les habitations humaines tout en évitant la 
promiscuité. 
Complémentation alimentaire 
Il s’agit d’apporter un peu d’aliment énergétique aux poussins sous mère en 
complément de ce qu’ils peuvent trouver dans la nature. 
L’aliment que nous avons proposé est un mélange de maïs br oyé (70%) et de son fin 
de riz (30%). Chaque poussin reçoit 10g de  ce mélange quotidiennement quel que soit l’âge 
jusqu’à la séparation de la mère. Chaque ménage  devrait construire un isoloir dans lequel les 
poussins vont recevoir leur alime nt complémentaire. Des pesées  mensuelles ont permis de 
suivre l’évolution de leurs poids respectifs en fonction de l’âge. 
Analyse économique 
L’analyse économique permet de voir la rentabilité, ou non, des interventions 
entreprises. Il s’agit donc de comparer les coûts de production aux revenus générés. 
RESULTATS 
Abri 
Notre action se limitait plutôt à des propositions  d’amélioration des abris existants : la 
construction d’aménagements i ndépendants, séparés totalement des habitations humaines 
étant sérieusement compromise, vu la situation d’insécurité, en particulier en milieu rural. 
Plusieurs types ont été rencontrés:  
 
147
 
Construction d’abri, indépendant de la maison d’habitation :  
Ce type est de moins en moins possible. Actuellement, il est même à déconseiller. Un 
seul ménage a pu construire ce modèle d’abri pour ses volailles grâce à un environnement 
favorable (présence d’enceinte): cas du ménage 214 
Un deuxième ménage a égalem ent profité de la situati on favorable offerte par la 
présence d’une clôture, bien avant nos interventions : il s’agit du ménage 217. 
Malheureusement, ayant été victime d’un cambriolage en novembre 2000, le ménage 
217 s’est momentanément désintéressé de to ute proposition d’amélioration de cet abri 
traditionnel. 
Construction d’un abri type mais toujours collé à la maison d’habitation du propriétaire : 
• avec une (des) ouverture(s) indépenda nte(s) : cas des ménages 111, 112, 213, 
223, 224 et 236 
• avec une ouverture dans la chambre d’habitation (ou cuisine), cas du ménage 
222 
Construction d’un abri à l’intérieur d’une cuisine ou d’une chambre d’habitation 
• avec condamnation de la chamber, cas du ménage 232 
• avec utilisation simultanée de la cuisine ou de la chamber, cas des ménages 131, 
235 et 2310 et 234   
Construction d’abri dans un magasin 
• cas des ménages 113, 126 et 226  
Construction d’abri sous l’escalier 
• cas des ménages 116, 114 et 237 
• sans abri particulier : hébergement des volailles directement : 
o dans une cuisine 
o cas des ménages 115, 123, 127, 225 et 227  
o dans une chambre d’habitation 
o cas des ménages 215, 229 et 233 
Complémentation alimentaire 
Composition chimique de l’aliment complémentaire 
L’analyse physico-chimique de l’aliment complémentaire expérimental a donné 9,7% 
de protéine brute et 8,1% de matières grasses (Tableau I). 
 
 
148
 
TABLEAU I. ANALYSE PHYSICO-CHIMIQUE DE L’ALIMENT COMPLEMENTAIRE. 
Eléments analysés Teneur en % par rapport 
au produit brut 
Teneur en % par rapport 
à la matière sèche 
Humidité 8,3 - 
Matière sèche 91,7 100 
Protéine brute 9,7 10,5 
Matières grasses 8,1 8,83 
Cellulose brute 4,3 4,68 
Impact sur la croissance des poussins 
Les relevés de poids des poussins avant ou pendant la complémentation alimentaire 
ont été rassemblés et présentés sous forme de  courbes. Pour la saison humide, les deux 
courbes de tendance se séparent dè s les premiers jours et la diff érence est à l’avantage de la 
complémentation alimentaire (F ig.1). Par contre, pour la sais on sèche, les deux courbes se 
superposent, pendant toute la durée de vie des poussins avec leur s mères. Toutefois, vers la 
fin de la vie commune du couple mère/poussins , les deux courbes se sont séparées petit à 
petit; l’écart qui se creusait au f il des âges (jusqu’à 125 jours), se mble être au profit de la 
situation sans complémentation. En effet, l’allure de la courbe semble démontrer que 
l’aliment complémentaire a pr ovoqué un effet inverse, autremen t dit un ralentissement de 
croissance (Fig.2). 
En se référant aux courbe s des gains moyens quotidiens (GMQ), la comparaison 
montre une très grande variabilité des valeurs obtenues en absence de complémentation 
alimentaire:  
• des parties où la c ourbe des GMQ est croissante,  correspondant à des périodes 
favorables pendant lesquelles le gain moyen peut aller jusqu’à 9,8g (TAB. II, Fig. 
3). 
• d’autres parties où la c ourbe reste stationnaire ou franchement décroissante 
indiquant des périodes difficiles où l’on assiste à des pertes de poids (GMQ à valeur 
négative).  
En apportant une complémentation alimentaire aux poussins: 
• la courbe de variation des GMQ est beau coup plus rectiligne, montrant ainsi une 
croissance plus homogène et plus sout enue, moins entrecoupée. Le GMQ des 
poussins sous mère reste cr oissant depuis l’éclosion jusqu’à l’âge de séparation de 
la mère (Tableau II). 
• à 3 mois, l’apport d’aliment  complémentaire est stoppé  (l’âge de séparation 
moyen des poussins de leur mè re étant de 87 jours dans la  situation de référence, 
c’est-à-dire, avant la complémentation). A cette période précise, le GMQ chute de 
8,2g à 2,15g, mais remonte peu à peu pour atteindre et même dépasser le GMQ 
maximal obtenu (8,2g) penda nt l’apport alimentaire en 45j post-séparation 
(Tableau.II, Fig.3).  
 
149
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125
Age (en jour)
Poids (en gramme)
 
 
FIG. 1. Courbe d’évolution de poids des poussins (saison humide) 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125
Age (en jour)
Poi ds ( en g ramme )
 
FIG. 2. Courbe d’évolution de poids des poussins (saison sèche) 
Sans complémentation Avec complémentation 
150
 
TABLEAU II. EVOLUTION DES GAINS MOYENS QUOTIDIENS. 
Age (en mois) Ec-
0,5 
0,5-1 1-1,5 1,5-2 2-2,5 2,5-3 3-3,5 3,5-4 4,5-5 
Sans Complé-
mentation 
 
 
0,83 
 
3,08 
 
7,4 
 
-0,01
 
9,8 
 
7,8 
 
-4,9
 
14,8
 
9,34 
 
 
GMQ 
(g/j) AvecComplé-
mentation 
0,95 
 
3,15 
 
4,25
 
5,4 
 
6,2 
 
8,26
 
2,15
 
7,15
 
7,65 
 
 
 
 
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Ec
]Ec - 0,5]
]0,5 - 1]
]1 - 1,5]
]1,5 -  2]
]2 - 2,5]
]2,5 -  3]
]3 - 3,5]
]3,5 -  4]
]4 - 4,5]
Age (en mois)
GMQ
Sans supplémentation Avec suppémentation
 
FIG. 3. Courbe d’évolution des GMQ 
Evolution des effectifs 
Effectif élevé 
Le nombre de ménages a beaucoup dimi nué : il est passé de 35 à 21 familles 
seulement. Des ménages ont abandonné en c ours de route, par manque de motivation. Ce 
phénomène a été surtout constaté dans la zone 1 où nous n’avions plus que deux familles dans 
le village 12 et une famille unique dans le village 13. 
Pour la zone 2, les abandons faisaient plutôt suite à des évènements liés à l’insécurité; 
d’ailleurs, des nouveaux ménages se sont ralliés à nous pour pouvoir profiter des activités du 
projet. 
A partir du tableau des mouvements d’effec tifs des deux zones, nous avons pu calculer 
facilement les paramètres suivants (Tableau III) : 
• le cheptel élevé semble se stabiliser : en une année, un accroissement de +3,5% 
seulement a été enregistré. 
• le nombre de poules par ménage passe  de 2,4 (mai 1999)) à 8, actuellement 
(avril 2004) en passant par 6,5 (mai 2003).  
• le sexe ratio a fortement changé : il est actuellement de 1 coq pour 6,2 poules 
alors qu’il était de 1 coq pour 3,6 poules  en 1999 (au moment de l’enquête 
transversale). Nous signalons qu’il resta it sensiblement le même au début de 
l’exercice (mai 2003) avec 1 coq pour 4 poules. 
• le cheptel aviaire moyen familial n’a toutefois cessé d’augmenter de façon 
remarquable : il était de 11 têtes par ménage  au début du projet, s’élevait à 31 à la 
151
 
fin de la première intervention et atteignait 36 à la fin de la deuxième intervention 
(avril 2004). 
TABLEAU III. MOUVEMENT DES EFFECTIFS. (ZONES 1 ET 2) 
Paramètres Classe C Classe G Classe AF Classe AM TOTAL 
Effectif initial 
(mai 2003) 
321 247 137 33 738 
Poussins neufs 1481 - - -  
Mortalités 646 40 12 1 699 
Perte 37 17 2 1 57 
Achat 0 7 0 0 7 
Sortie (transfert)  745 95 - - - 
Entrée (transfert) - 745 81 14 832 
Entrusted in 12 10 2 3 27 
Entrusted out 12 12 4 0 28 
Exploitation 20 631 34 21 706 
Effectif final 
(avril 2004) 
354 215 168 27 764 
 
Effectif exploité 
Pour la partie exploitée, il a été confirmé, une fois encore, que le poulet est le produit 
principal : plus de 89% des volailles exploitées sortent de cette classe (Tableau IV). 
TABLEAU IV. RECENSEMENT DU CHEPEL EXPLOITE. 
Classe Classe C C lasse G Classe 
AF 
Classe 
AM 
TOTAL Pourcentage 
Vendu 13 419 7 4 443 62,8 
Consommé 7 209 27 17 260 36,8 
Don 0 3 0 0 3 0,4 
TOTAL 20 631 34 21 706 100 
Pourcentage 2,8 89,4 4,8 3,0 100 - 
 
Lors de l’exercice antérieur, la consommation l’emportait sur la vente. Pour cette 
année, la vente a largement dominé la consommation en absorbant plus de 62% de la totalité 
de l’effectif exploité. La conduite adoptée par les ménage s reste inchangée : le taux 
d’exploitation enregistré s’élève à environ 96% par rapport à l’effectif initial (706/738) 
(Tableau III). 
Mortalité 
Mortalité globale 
Le taux de mortalité global obtenu à la suite de cette deuxième intervention est du 
même ordre que celui de la première (22,8% contre 21,07%) avec, toutefois, une nette 
diminution des mortalités de la  classe adulte et de la cl asse poulette et une apparente 
augmentation de la mortalité de la classe poussin (35,8% contre 29,3%) (Tableau V). 
152
 
TABLEAU V. TAUX DE MORTALITE GLOBAL ET PAR CLASSE.  
 Classe 
poussin (C) 
Classe 
poulette (G) 
Classe adulte 
(AF/AM) 
TOTAL 
     
Effectif total (n) 1802 992 265 3059 
Mortalité 646 40 13 699 
Pourcentage 35,8 4,0 4,9 22,8 
Analyse des mortalités 
L’analyse des causes de mortalité montre également les mêmes résultats que ceux de 
la première intervention à savoir, la dominance des facteurs « autres », l’absence de grandes 
épidémies attribuables à la pasteurellose, la présence des maladies parasitaires et de la variole 
touchant principalement la classe « poussin » (Tableau VI). 
TABLEAU VI. REPARTITION DES MORTALITES PAR CAUSE. 
Causes des 
mortalités 
Classe C Classe G Cla sse AF Classe AMTOTAL 
NDV 0 0 0 0 0 
Variole 25 0 0 0 25 
Pasteurellose 0 0 0 0 0 
Parasitisme 196 0 0 0 196 
Voiture 9 16 3 0 28 
Prédateur 80 3 1 1 85 
Autres 336 21 8 0 365 
TOTAL 646 40 12 1 699 
Analyse économique 
La complémentation alimentaire et la c onstruction d’abri, couplées à la vaccination 
anti-maladie de Newcastle et le déparasitage des poussins engendrent des bénéfices égaux à 
3,2 fois la valeur des dépenses engagées (Tab leaux VII et VIII). Le revenu du ménage se 
trouve multiplier par 3 fois et demie (3,6). 
TABLEAU VII. RESULTATS D’EXPLOITATION AVANT ET APRES INTERVENTIONS. 
Valeur estimée Revient par famille Période Nombre de 
volailles  FMG* US$ Nombre en FMG en US$ 
Avant 
Interventio
ns 
 
231 
 
2.474.000 
 
380,62 
 
7,7 
 
82.466
 
12,68 
Après 
Interventio
ns 
 
706 
 
11.145.000
 
1177,31
 
33,62 
 
530.714
 
56,06 
* FMG, franc malgache garanti (monnaie locale) 
 
 
153
 
TABLEAU VIII . RESULTAT FINANCIER DE L’EXPLOITATION APRES 12 MOIS 
D’INTERVENTION. (PAR FAMILLE) 
REVENUS TIRES DE L’EXPLOITATION (US$) CHARGES (US$) 
Après 
interventions 
 
56,06 
 
Coût du vaccin 
 
0,41 
Frais divers 0,61 
Médicament anti- 
parasitaire 
 
0,24 
Coût abri 2,11 
COÛT DE LA 
PARIE 
EXPLOITEE  
Avant 
interventions 
 
 
12,68 
Complémentation 6,96 
DIFFERENCE 43,38 Charges totales 10,32 
BENEFICE                33,05 
BENEFICE/CHARGES  
(Return) 
                 3,20 
DISCUSSION  
Pour la plupart des éleveurs, les abris ont été déjà existants et seulement améliorés. La 
stratégie globale adoptée par les ménages dans la construction et la mise en place de ces abris 
tend toujours vers le rapproche ment des volailles de leurs habitations. Ce phénomène est 
fortement lié à la situation d’insécurité qui, depuis ces dernières années, s’enracine de plus en 
plus dans le milieu rural. 
L’aliment complémentaire a pporté aux poussins renferme 9,7% de protéine brute, 
protéine totalement d’origine végétale. De la naissance à 3 mois d’âge, la teneur normale en 
matière azotée brute (MAB) d’une ration équilib rée des poussins tourne  atour de 20%. Cette 
ration est distribuée quantitativement à raison de 10g par jour et par individu pendant la 
première semaine ; quantité qui sera augmentée jusqu’à 65g au début de la 12 e semaine 
[11,12]. Ainsi, la ration complémentaire expé rimentale n’apporte qu ’environ la moitié des 
besoins protéiques de la pre mière semaine d’âge du poussin, sans compter l’absence des 
protéines d’origine animale. Dans ces conditions, il est évident que le poussin reste, dans une 
large mesure, dépendant des ressources alimentaires offertes par la nature.  
La courbe de croissance témoin fait re ssortir que nos poussins traversaient 
apparemment deux période s critiques : la première , pendant la quinzaine  qui suit le premier 
mois d’âge et la seconde, la quinzaine qui suit le 3 e mois d’âge autrement dit, le moment de 
séparation de la mère. 
Etant donné que la croissance est une f onction directe de l’ alimentation, cette 
variabilité de l’aspect de la courbe obtenue traduit à première vue la variabilité de la 
disponibilité des aliments offert s par la nature (alternance de s périodes d’affluence et des 
périodes de disette). Dans  notre situation où la complément ation alimentaire n’apporte pas la 
totalité des besoins nutritionnels des poussins, les ressources alimentaires de base (SFRB pour 
scavenging food resource base) jouent un rôle tr ès important dans la possibilité de correction 
[7, 8]. Les deux périodes critiques sont certainement liées au déficit alimentaire de base. 
Si, dans la situation d’avan t complémentation, la premiè re période critique nous est 
difficile à expliquer, la seconde  est certainement liée à cette séparation de la mère pendant 
laquelle les nouveaux poulets acquièrent leur tota le indépendance et sont contraints à se 
débrouiller seuls. L’aide matern elle étant stoppée, ils ont du mal à s’y adapter et à mettre à 
profit cette indépendance. Apparemment, cette déroute ne dure qu’une quinzaine de jours car, 
154
 
ils arrivent déjà à doubler (14,8g) le dernier GMQ en compagnie de leur mère (7,8g) lors de la 
deuxième quinzaine suivant la séparation. 
Avec une complémentation alimentaire, la crise du premier mois d’âge semble avoir 
complètement disparu; celle de l’âge de séparation de la mère persiste mais avec une intensité 
fortement réduite. La disparition de la première  période critique et ce tte réduction des effets 
de la séparation sous la complémentation est un indice sérieux en faveur de l’importance du 
facteur alimentaire pour expliquer le phénomène. L’aliment complémentaire permet aux 
poussins de garder une courbe de croissance b eaucoup plus linéaire autrement dit, moins en 
dents de scie. 
Toutefois, la vitesse de croissance semble ne pas être significativement améliorée. En 
effet, l’évolution du poids des poussins, de l’éclosion à la séparation de la mère est à priori, de 
même ordre de grandeur. 
La stagnation relative du cheptel caractéris e la conduite adoptée par les ménages : ils 
préfèrent d’emblée exploiter les moindres résultats plutôt que de laisser grossir le cheptel [9]. 
Cette attitude est dictée par la situation de nécessité permanen te des ménages et/ou par la 
situation d’insécurité en milieu rural. 
L’amélioration du sex ratio qui  se traduit surtout par l’augmentation du nombre des 
femelles adultes est un témoin d’une meilleure exploitation des coqs en faveur de la 
préservation des femelles. [13]. Ce choix semble être logique dans la mesure où, dans une 
même portée, le mâle a toujour s une croissance plus rapide et  par conséquent, atteint l’âge 
commercial avant la femelle.  
Une fois encore, le taux d’exploitation par rapport à l’effectif du départ s’est montré 
très élevé (96%) où la classe poulette représen te plus de 89% des volailles exploitées. Ces 
résultats concordent parfaitement à ceux de la première intervention. L’analyse des mortalités 
a donné des résultats globaux plus ou moins identiques à ceux de l’intervention sanitaire [10].  
Toutefois, la classe « poussin » reste toujours la première victime avec un taux de 
mortalité légèrement augmenté (35,8% contre 29,3%). L’augmen tation du taux de mortalité 
des poussins est due au facteur « autres » qui , rappelons-le, regroupe lui-même un certain 
nombre de facteurs tels que le piétinement, l’égarement, les accidents divers, les facteurs 
climatiques (vent, température, pluie, etc…). Cette élévation serait liée à la sévérité des 
conditions climatiques que traversait Madagascar l’année 2004 où deux cyclones tropicaux se 
sont relayés en l’espace d’une semaine. 
L’analyse économique de cette deuxième in tervention a indiqué un coût plus élevé 
(10,32 US$) par rapport à la pr emière (2,00 US$) et par cons équent, un rapport bénéfice sur 
charges (
return) fortement réduit. Mais le revenu se trouve toutefois multiplié par 3 fois et 
demie, ce qui rejoint les résultats de BELL avec la vaccination anti-maladie Newcastle seule 
[14]. Il faut remarquer que la complémentation alimentaire occupe à elle seule plus de 67% 
des coûts de revient des interventions.  
REMERCIEMENTS 
Les auteurs remercient viveme nt le FOFIFA-DRZV pour la logistique et surtout le 
parrainage qu’il a bien voulu apporter au Proj et MAG 10 185. Les plus vifs remerciements 
sont également adressés à la division conjointe FAO/AIEA, Agence Internationale de 
155
 
l’Energie Atomique (AIEA) pour avoir financé ce projet combien important pour l’Economie 
Rurale des pays africains. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] KOKO, M., MAMINIAINA, O.F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S.J., 
Aviculture villageoise : produc tivité et situation épidémio logique. In: Characteristics 
and parameters of family poultry produc tion in Africa. FAO/IAEA Coordinated 
Research Programme (2002) 47- 63 
[2] PANDEY, V. S., Epidemiology and economic s of village poultry pr oduction in africa : 
Overview. In: PANDEY, V. S. AND DEMEY, F. Village poultry production in africa. 
Conference Proceedings. Rabat, Morocco, (1992). 124-128 
[3] BAGUST, T. J., Improving health for a poultry industry in Asia: a developemental 
perspective. Avian pathology 23 (1994) 395-404. 
[4] BAGUST, T. J., Village and free-range po ultry in health and disease. Comenwealth 
Veterinary Association: Regional work shop on livestock production in the South 
Pacific Islands. 27-30 October 1999. 
[5] PERMIN, A., BISGAARD, M., A general re view on some important diseases in free-
range chickens. Poultry as a tool in Pove rty Eradication and Promotion of Gender 
Equality. Proceedings of a Workshop, March 22-26, Tune Landboskole, Denmark 
(1999) 181-187. 
[6] BELL, J. G., ABDOU, I., Dynamics of villa ge poultry production in the Keita region of 
Niger, Nig. J. Anim. Prod. 22 (1995) 141-144. 
[7] GUNARATNE, S.P., CHANDRASIRI, A.D.N., MANGALIKA HEMALATHA, W.A.P., 
ROBERTS, J.A., Feed resource base for scavenging village chickens in Sri Lanka, 
Trop. Anim. Hlth Prod. 25 (1993) 249-257. 
[8] SONAIYA, E.B., DAZOGBO, J.S., OLUKOSI,  O.A., Further assessment of scavenging 
feed resource base. In: Characteristics a nd parameters of famil y poultry production in 
Africa. FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Programme (2002) 193-200. 
[9] BRANCKAERT, R., FAO and rural poultry development. In: Sustainable rural poultry 
production in Africa. Proceedings ANRPD, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (1997) 24-29. 
[10] KOKO, M., MAMINIAINA, O.F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S.J., 
Impacts de la vaccination anti-maladie de Newcastle et du déparasitage des poussins 
sur la productivité de l’aviculture villageoise à Madagascar (cette publication) 
[11] FEDIDA, D., Guide to poultry management in tropical conditions. SANOFI Santé 
Nutrition Animale. France (1995) 117pp. 
[12] CORI, G., Les productions animales à Madagascar. Cours à l’usage des lycées agricoles, 
tome II, 2
ème année. SEFA - Ministère de l’Agricu lture et de l’Expansion Rurale. Ed. 
BDPA (1971) 1016pp.  
[13] IEMVT. Développement de l’aviculture  traditionnelle en Afrique tropicale. Fiche 
technique d’Elevage tropical. Ministère de la coopération et du Développement, (1989) 
8pp 
[14] BELL, J. G., FOTZO, T. M., AMARA, A., AGBEDE, G., Dynamique de la volaille 
villageoise dans la région de Dschang, Cameroun. In: Issues in Family Poultry 
Research and Development. Proceedings INFPD workshop, M’Bour, Sénégal (2000) 
96–101. 
156
 
AVICULTURE VILLAGEOISE A MADAGASCAR: ENQUETE 
EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE 
M. KOKO1, O.F. MAMINIAINA1, J. RAVAOMANANA2.; S.J. 
RAKOTONINDRINA2 
1Institut Malgache des Vaccins Vétérinaires, Ministère de l’Education National et de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
2Département de Recherches Zootechniques et Vétérinaires, FOFIFA, Ministère de 
l’Education National et de la Recherche Scientifique, Antananarivo, Madagascar 
Résumé 
Pour compléter les données socio-économiques et épidémiologiques réalisées entre 1999 et 
2000, d’autres investigations visant à confirmer les résultats, ont été menées. Ainsi, le virus de la 
maladie de Newcastle, maladie reconnue comme étant la première contrainte sanitaire du sous-secteur 
avicole traditionnel, a été isolé et identifié. Par des études sérologiques, des anticorps spécifiques 
contre un certain nombre de maladies ont été également détectés. Il s’agit de la bronchite infectieuse, 
de la maladie de Gumboro et de la salmonellose à 
Salmonella pullorum dont la séroprévalence s’élève 
à 96%, 64% et 1,77% respectivement. 
Abstract 
VILLAGE POULTRY IN MADAGASCAR: EPIDEMIOLOGICAL SURVEY .  
To complete the socio-economic and epidemiological data obtained between 1999 and 2000, 
other investigations aiming to confirm the results were carried out. Thus, Newcastle disease virus, 
recognised as the first health constraint in the trad itional avian sub sector, was isolated and identified. 
Through serological studies specific antibodies against a number of diseases were detected. The 
seroprevalence of infectious bronchitis, Gumboro disease, and Salmonella pullorum was 96%, 64% 
and 1.77% respectively. 
INTRODUCTION 
Les enquêtes socio-économiques et épidé miologiques effectuées entre 1999 et 2000 
ont révélé la faiblesse de la productivité du système et la pl ace des contraintes sanitaires 
parmi les principaux facteurs limitants de l’aviculture villageoise. La lutte contre les 
pathologies dominantes (vaccination anti-Nawcastle et déparasitage interne des poussins sous 
mère, ont permis de réduire de façon significative les mortalités au niveau de chaque classe. 
Toutefois, une mortalité résiduelle relativement importante persiste, en particulier 
chez les poussins où l’on enregistre encore annuellement quelques 29,3% de pertes jusqu’à 
l’âge de séparation de la mère [1]. Cette persistance de mortalité témoigne la présence des 
facteurs autres que les maladies ciblées. En effet, la multiplicité des contraintes est une des 
caractéristiques fondamentales de l’aviculture traditionnelle  dans les pays africains
. Pour 
Madagascar, en dehors des pathologies classique s composées de la maladie de Newcastle, de 
la variole et de la pasteurello se, plusieurs autres maladies av iaires d’origine virale font 
actuellement l’objet de vaccination dans le sous-secteur avicole commercial. Leur présence et 
leurs impacts dans l’aviculture villa geoise locale restent très mal connus
. En se servant des 
examens histologiques doublés d’un diagnostic vi rologique, Rajaonarison et son équipe, en 
1993, ont mis en évidence, pour la première fois, l’existence de la maladie de Gumboro dans 
le grande Ile [2]. Par des études sérologiques,  Porphyre, en 1999, a signalé par la suite, la 
présence de la BI, de la maladie de Gumbor o, de l’encépholomyélite aviaire chez le poulet 
villageois [3]. Les observations cliniques fa ites durant toute la durée du projet ne nous 
157
 
permettant de tirer aucune conclusion, une étude sérologique a été effectuée pour la recherche 
de la bronchite et de la bur site infectieuses. Enfin, en ce qui concerne la maladie de 
Newcastle, des essais d’isolement du virus ont  été entrepris pour renforcer les résultats 
d’autopsie et de diagnostic sérologique réalisés pendant la phase d’enquête. 
MATERIEL ET METHODES 
Isolement et identification du virus de la maladie de Newcastle (NDV) 
Prélèvements d’organe et/ou de liquide biologique 
Deux sortes de prélèvement ont été faites pour isoler le virus Newcastle au moment 
des épidémies: 
• la tête des volailles malades coupée après autopsie 
• du liquide cloacal ou trachéal prélevé au sein d’un individu convalescent 
présentant encore des séque lles de maladie de Newcastle à l’aide du coton stérile, 
dont le milieu de transport est constitué pa r du milieu de culture cellulaire (MEM) 
additionné d’antibiotiques (pénicilline – streptomycine). 
Cellules BSR 
Les cellules BSR (clone des cellules BHK21) sont cultivées dans des flacons plastiques 
Falcon de 25 cm2 dans du milieu MEM Eagle (SIGMA) additionné de sérum de bovin (5 à 
10%) et d’une solution antibiotique (pénicilline 100 UI par ml et streptomycine 100µg par 
ml).  
Pour isoler le virus NDV, les prélèvemen ts cloacaux ou trachéaux sont inoculés 
directement sur cellules BSR. Pour la tête, le cerveau est prélevé stérilement, broyé au 1/10 e 
dans une solution antibiotique (pénic illine 100 UI par ml v/v, streptomycine 100 µg par ml 
p/v). La suspension d’organe ainsi obtenue  est clarifiée avec un filtre Millipore 0,45 µm puis 
inoculée également aux cellules BSR. Une lecture quotidienne au microscope permet de 
suivre l’évolution de la culture et de détecter l’apparition éventuelle d’une lyse spécifique des 
Paramyxovirus (syncitium). 
Après 3 jours d’incubation à 37°C, les ce llules inoculées sont congelées à –20°C, 
décongelées et centrifugées à 3000 rpm. Seul le  surnageant de culture cellulaire fait l’objet 
d’une récolte. Des passages supplémentaires  sont souvent nécessa ires pour confirmer 
l’isolement, en adaptant le virus. En cas de lyse cellulaire, le pouvoir hémagglutinant du 
surnageant de culture est testé en présence d’une suspension d’hématies de coq (0,5% dans de 
l’eau physiologique 0,85%). Ensuite, en cas des résultats positifs, le virus hémagglutinant 
subit le test IHA pour son identification en se servant du sérum positif  de référence : une 
suspension de virus contenant 4 UHA est mélangée à une série de dilution de 2 en 2 de 
l’antisérum [4].  
Plaques de microtitration 
Les plaques utilisées sont des plaques de  96 puits à fond U et à faible capacité 
d’absorption de protéines (NUNC). Elles servent à titrer le pouvoir hémagglutinant des isolats 
et à les identifier par le biais du test IHA ou test d’inhibition de l’hémagglutination. 
158
 
Réactifs 
Pour identifier les virus isolés, un sérum de référence anti-Newcastle, souche Lasota (Animal 
Health Service) a été utilisé. 
Recherche de Salmonella 
Elle a été réalisée par application de la technique d’agglutination rapide sur lame 
(ARL) sur des plaques en porcelaine : une goutte de sérum mélangée avec une goutte 
d’antigène. L’antigène utilisé est l’antigène pullorum (LSI).  
Dosage des anticorps anti-bursite et anti-bronchite infectieuses 
Les dosages d’anticorps anti-maladie de Gumboro et des antic orps anti-bronchite 
infectieuse ont été confiés au Laboratoire de la Maison du Petit Elevage (MPE). Les tests ont 
été réalisés en utilisant des Kits ELISA (CIVTEST TM - HIPRA). Les titres anticorps 
correspondants ont été calculés en utilisant le s formules mentionnées dans les notices 
accompagnant les Kits. 
RESULTATS 
Isolement du virus de Newcastle  
Inoculation sur cellules BSR 
Cinq prélèvements ont pu être traités : 3 cerveaux (numérotés C1, C 2 et C3), un 
liquide cloacal (LC1) et un liquide trachéal (LT1). Tous  les inocula ont provoqué des 
arrondissements de ce llules au premier passage, mais seuls le cerveau n°2 (C2) et le liquide 
trachéal (LT1) se sont montrés réellement positifs jusqu’au 3e passage (Tableau I).  
TABLEAU I. ISOLEMENT DES SOUCHES SAUVAGES NDV SUR CELLULES BSR. 
Lecture au microscope Origine du 
prélèvement 
N° de Code 
1er passage* 2 e passage 3e passage 
C1 + - - 
C2 ++ +++ +++ 
 
Cerveau 
C3 + - - 
Liquide trachéal LT1 - - - 
Liquide cloacal LC1 + + + 
* : signe + indique la présence de lyse, signe – indique l’absence de lyse 
 
Le C2 lyse totalement les cellules au bout de 48 à 72 heur es d’incubation. Par contre, 
le LC1 ne provoque qu’une lyse  débutante: il nécessite peut -être d’autres passages 
d’adaptation (Tableau I).  
Titrage du pouvoir hémagglutinant des isolats. 
Tous les surnageants de culture cellulaire inoculée ont été titrés en présence du virus 
témoin Pe (souche Mukteswar). 
 
159
 
TABLEAU II. TITRAGE DU POUVOIR HEMAGGLUTINANT.  
Isolats 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
- - - - - - - - - - - -  
C1 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
+ + + + + + - - - - - -  
C2 + + + + + + - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - -  
C3 - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - LT1 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - LC1 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
+ + + + + + + + + - - -  
Pe + + + + + + + + + - - - 
Dilution 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024 2048 TGR*
* TGR : témoin globules rouges ou hématies 
 
Ainsi, C2 a un titre hémagglutinant égal  à 64 UHA (Unité Hémagglutinante) ; alors 
que celui du témoin positif s’élève à 512 UHA. Les autres isolements ont été négatifs.  
Par contre, LC1 n’a donné aucun titre hémagglutinant bien que ce prélèvement a 
provoqué une lyse cellulaire. Etait-ce une ly se non spécifique ou s’agit-il d’un virus non 
hémagglutinant? 
Test d’Inhibition de l’Hémagglutination (IHA) 
Le sérum de référence a respectivement les titres de (Tableau III): 
• 512 (7log2) en présence de C2 (4 UHA) 
• 256 (6log2) en présence de Pe (4 UHA) 
Ce résultat nous permet de c onfirmer que l’isolat C2 est un virus de la maladie de 
Newcastle. 
TABLEAU III. IDENTIFICATION DE L’ISOLAT C2 PAR TEST IHA. 
Isolats 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
- - - - - - - + + + - -  
C2 - - - - - - - + + + - - 
- - - - - - + + + + - -  
Pe - - - - - - + + + + - - 
Dilution SP* 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024 2048 4096 TS** TGR 
* SP : sérum positif de référence (AHS) 
** : TS : témoin sérum 
Agglutination rapide sur lame pour recherche de Salmonella 
Quelque 113 sérums ont été testés avec l’an tigène pullorique. Les résultats ont donné 
2 positifs, 1 douteux et 110 négatifs (Tableau IV). 
160
 
TABLEAU IV. RESLTATS DES TESTS A L’ANTIGENE PULLORIQUE. 
Dates de prélèvement  
Période Juin 99 Février 00 Juin 00 Mai 01 Août 03 Sept./Nov.03 Déc.03 
Nombre de 
sérums 
 
6 
 
9 
 
3 
 
12 
 
7 
 
57 
 
19 
Positif 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 
Douteux 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
Négatif 6 9 3 10 5 56 19 
Recherche d’anticorps anti-bursite (anti-IBD) et anti-bronchite infectieuses (anti-IBV) 
Les dosages d’anticorps effectués sur les 50  sérums testés ont donné (Tableaux V et 
VI): 
• pour la bursite infectieuse : 64% de positifs 
• pour la bronchite infectieuse : 96% de positifs  
De telles séroprévalences sont largement en faveur de la circulation des virus des deux 
maladies dans l’aviculture villageoise des deux zones écologiques étudiées. 
TABLEAU V.  RESULTATS D’ELISA INDIRECT POUR DETECTION D’ANTICORPS ANTI-
IBD. 
Statut Négatif Douteux Positif Total 
Nombre 13 5 32 50 
Pourcentage 26% 10% 64% 100 
TABLEAU VI . RESULTATS D’ELISA INDIRECT POUR DETECTION D’ANTICORPS ANTI-
IBV. 
Statut Négatif Douteux Positif Total 
Nombre 2 0 48 50 
Pourcentage 4% 0% 96% 100 
DISCUSSION  
Le sous-secteur avicole traditionnel, basé sur l’élevage des volailles en liberté est très 
important dans le monde et en  particulier en Afrique où il re nferme plus de 80% de la 
population aviaire totale [5], et cela, malgré le taux de mortalité très élevé dû à la présence de 
multiples contraintes. Les maladies Fig.nt par mi les premiers facteurs  limitant la productivité 
de l’aviculture traditionnelle. Le s résultats rapportés par Per min et ses collaborateurs ont 
confirmé la diversité des mala dies dans le sous-secteur [5].  Pour le cas de Madagascar, 
l’utilisation des vaccins contre toute une liste de pathologies aviaires, dans les élevages 
commerciaux, constitue déjà un premier indice en faveur de leur présence et leur importance 
économique [3].  
Les données récoltées lors des enquêtes so cio-économico-épidémiologiques, dans le 
cadre de ce projet ont confirmé l’importance de la MN sur la mortalité chez toutes les classes 
d’âge et des parasitoses internes spécialemen t sur celle des poussins [1, 2, 6, 7]. Cette 
classification de la MN comme maladie la plus dévastatrice de l’aviculture villageoise 
concorde parfaitement avec les résultats de re cherche menés dans plusieurs autres pays 
161
 
africains [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. La vaccination anti-New castle et le déparasitage des poussins sous 
mère, réalisés pendant notre pr emière phase d’intervention ont considérablement réduit le 
taux global de mortalité de tout le cheptel encadré [1]. Quant aux autres maladies infectieuses, 
les méthodes de suivi et d’év aluation adoptées ne nous perme ttaient pas de mesurer leur 
présence ni leurs impacts dans le sous-sect eur aviculture traditionnelle. Les travaux de 
Rajaonarison sont sans équivoque, en ce qui concerne la présence de la bursite infectieuse [2]. 
Les enquêtes séro-épidémiologiques de Porphyre ont  confirmé cette présence et en plus, celle 
d’autres pathologies d’orig ine virale à savoir, la bronchite infectieuse (IBV), 
l’encephalomyélite aviaire, etc… avec des sé ro-prévalences respectives de 79,5% et 41,2% 
[3]. 
Un rapprochement sur la mortalité résiduelle des poussins vaccinés contre la MN a été 
tenté sur la base de ces résultats de Porphyre mais, les observations cliniques et les autopsies 
réalisées jusqu’alors ne permettaient pas de les conf irmer. Seuls les syndromes respiratoires 
rencontrés ces deux dernières années, bien visi bles chez la classe « adulte » (car ils 
s’accompagnent d’un arrêt de ponte chez la poule pondeuse), contemporains à une élévation 
de mortalité chez les poussins pourraient être  éventuellement attr ibués à la bronchite 
infectieuse. Par contre, les enquêtes sérologiques étaient pl us formelles : les dosages 
d’anticorps anti-IBV et anti-IBD en se servant du kit ELISA « CIVTEST » ont donné des 
résultats en parfaite concordance à ceux de Porphyre, en utilisant du kit « KPL » : avec un 
taux de séropositivité respectiv ement de 96% et 64%, indiquant  la contamination et la 
circulation de ces virus dans l’aviculture villageoise des deux zones d’étude, comme dans 
beaucoup d’autres pays africains [3, 13]. Quant à la recherche d’anticorps anti-
Salmonella 
pullorum, 2 sérums s’averraient être positifs sur les 113 sérums, récoltés à différents 
moments ; ce qui représente environ 1,77%. Bien que ce taux soit relativement bas par rapport 
à ceux d’autres pays, ce résultat constitue un indice en faveur de la présence du germe 
Salmonella pullorum  [13]. La salmonellose à S. pullorum , intéresse beaucoup plus les 
poussins, alors que les sérums te stés provenaient des classes « poulette » et « adulte ». 
L’utilisation de l’antigène S. gallinarum serait beaucoup plus adéquate pour tester ces sérums. 
Ces quelques résultats confirmaient, une fois de plus , la diversité des maladies 
évoluant dans le système où l’on peut dire qu’un oiseau mourant lors du passage de la MN par 
exemple, pouvait à la fois être polyparasité, sér opositif contre plusieurs autres maladies et 
souffrant en même temps d’une carence nutritionnelle chronique [13].  
 
REMERCIEMENTS 
Les auteurs remercient viveme nt le FOFIFA-DRZV pour la logistique et surtout le 
parrainage qu’il a bien voulu apporter au Projet MAG 10 185. 
Les plus vifs remerciements sont égal ement adressés à la division conjointe 
FAO/AIEA, Agence Internationale de l’Ener gie Atomique (AIEA) pour avoir financé ce 
projet combien important pour l’Economie Rurale des pays africains. 
Nous tenons à remercier également la Mais on du Petit Elevage (MPE), en particulier 
l’équipe du Dr RAKOTOARITAHINA H., qui a bi en voulu analyser nos sérums en vue de 
rechercher la maladie de Gumboro et la bronchite infectieuse aviaire.  
 
162
 
REFERENCES 
[1] KOKO, MAMINIAINA, O.F., RAVAOMANANA, J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S.J., 
Aviculture villageoise : produc tivité et situation épidémio logique. In: Characteristics 
and parameters of family poultry produc tion in Africa. FAO/IAEA Coordinated 
Research Programme (2002) 47- 63 
[2] RAJAONARISON, J.J., RAKOTONINDRINA, S., KOKO, RAKOTONDRAMARY, E., 
RAZAFIMANJARY, S., Existence de la maladie de Gumboro (bursite infectieuse) à 
Madagascar. Revue Elev. Med. Vet. Pays trop., 47 (1) (1994)15-17 
[3] PORPHYRE, V., Enquête séro-épidémiologique sur les principales maladies infectieuses 
des volailles à Madagascar. Mémoire de DSS – Productions animales en régions 
chaudes, ENVL, Maisons Alfort, France (1999) 78pp 
[4] Allan W. and Gough R. E., A standart h aemagglutination-inhibition test for Newcastle 
disease. A comparison of macro and micro methods. Vet. Rec. 95: (1974)120-123. 
[5] PERMIN, A; HANSEN, J. W., Epidemiology, diagnosis and control of poultry parasites. 
FAO Animal Health Manual n° 4, (1998) 160 pages 
[6] DANHO, T., BODJO, S.C., ADON, H., KACOU, A., COUACY-HYMANN, E., 
Amélioration de l’environnement sanitaire de la volaille traditionnelle : cas de la Côte 
d’Ivoire. In: Characteristics and paramete rs of family poultry production in Africa. 
FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Programme (2002) 27- 32 
[7] PERMIN, A., PEDERSEN, G., The need for a holistic view on disease problems in free 
range chickens. In: Characteristics and pa rameters of family poultry production in 
Africa. FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research Programme (2002) 9–13 
[8] MOPATE, L.Y., HENDRIKS, P., IMADINE, M ., Contraintes sanitair es des poulets dans 
la région du centre-est du Tchad. In : Sonaiy a E.B. (Ed.), Issues in Family Poultry 
Development Research, Proceedings of an International Workshop held on December 
9-13, 1997, Senegal. Published by the Intern. Network for family Poultry 
Development. Faculty of Agriculture, Obafami Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria 
(1997) 88-95. 
[9] YONGOLO, M.G.S., Epidemiology of Newcastle disease in village chickens in Tanzania. 
MVM dissertation, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Morogoro, United Republic of 
Tanzania (1996) 234pp. 
[10] CHRYSOSTOME, C.A.A.M., BELL, J.G., DENXIEY, F., VERHULST, A., 
Seroprevalences to three diseases in village chickens in Benin, Prev. Vet. Med. 22 
(1995) 257-261. 
[11] BELL, J.G., KANE, M., Le JEAN, C., An investigation of the disease status of village 
poultry in Mauritania, Prev. Vet. Med. 8 (1990) 291-294.  
[12] BOURZAT, D., SAUNDERS, M., Improv ement of traditional methods of poultry 
production in Burkina Faso. In: Proceed ings, CTA Seminar, 3rd International 
symposium on poultry production in hot clima tes, Hameln, Germany, 12 June 1987 
(1990). 
[13] KICHOU, F., EL YOUSSOUFI, G., BIKOUR, H., JAOUZI, T., BENAAZZOU, H., 
Isolation, identification and pa thogenicity of Maroccan field isolates of infectious 
bursal disease virus, Proc. 48th Western Poultry Disease Conference. 24-27 April, 
Vancouver (1999) 119-121. 
163
 
THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE OF FAMILY POULTRY 
PRODUCTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS 
V.S. JUGESSUR¹, M.M. PILLAY¹, R. RAMNAUTH¹ AND M.J. ALLAS² 
¹Agricultural Research and Extension Unit, Food and Agricultural Research Council,  
Quatre Bornes, Mauritius 
²Agricultural Services, Citronelle, Rodrigues, Mauritius 
Abstract 
Almost every household keeps semi-scavenging family poultry in the backyard as a tradition, 
both for food and for the generation of additional income in Rodrigues, the second biggest island of 
the Republic of Mauritius. Recent studies have shown that improving husbandry and management 
practices on the farm can increase the return of th e family poultry farmer significantly. A survey was 
carried out on households with family poultry on the social and economic importance of family 
poultry production on the island in 2002. Results showed that on an average, the family poultry farmer 
was 50 years of age, 42% were illiterate, 32% of the farmers were women, and the family consisted of 
five members. Besides their main occupation, animal farming was the main side-activity of 56% of the 
households. 50% of the respondents reared chickens firstly for income, 43% for home consumption, 
4% for cultural reasons, and 3% simply for leisure. The profit obtained from the sale of chickens and 
eggs, and the monetary value of sale and home consumption of these commodities represented 9% and 
18% of the total income of the family, respectively. 65% of the households wished to expand family 
poultry production as they found this system of produc tion more profitable than the rearing improved 
commercial broilers and layers. The birds of 5% of the farmers constituted a nuisance to their 
neighbours. All the poultry merchants who marketed the family poultry found their business 
profitable, and wished to expand it. They priced the birds by their appearance, offered US $ 2 / kg live 
weight, and sold them at US $ 3.4 / kg live-weight to consumers in Mauritius. Family poultry had a 
guaranteed market, especially for being free scavenging birds, and for their rustic taste. 
Key words: Family poultry, survey, socio-economics, marketing, Mauritius 
INTRODUCTION  
Rodrigues is the second biggest island of th e Republic of Mauritius, 110 km² in area 
and is situated 595 km away from Mauritius, the main island of the Republic. Agriculture, 
livestock farming and fishing are the main occupation of the majority of the 35000 inhabitants 
of the island. This island has not developed socially and ec onomically as compared to 
Mauritius, which, with an area of 1860 km², and a population of 1.2 million, is getting 
industrialized, and has a Gro ss Domestic Product of US $ 4215. The economic sectors are 
namely, the services sector, the manufacturing sector, and agriculture that contribute to 70%, 
24% and 6% respectively to th e national economy. Livestock and poultry contribute to 12% 
in the share of agriculture. The Republic of Ma uritius is self-sufficient in poultry meat and 
eggs, the bulk of which is produced by industrial farms. The present yearly poultry meat 
production is estimated at 30000 tons. Family  poultry production is not of economic 
importance to Mauritius, but in Rodrigues, the rearing of the semi-scavenging and so-called 
‘local’ breed of chickens is considered to be an important source of both food and income to a 
large number of Rodriguan families. An improve ment in this system of poultry production 
was initiated through the joint FAO / IAEA applied research programme in which a survey 
was first carried out in three regions of the is land, namely Citronelle, St Gabriel and Trefles. 
The survey involving 15 farmers ha ving ‘local’ chickens was carried out in the winter season 
of 1999 and was repeated in the summer season of 2000. It provided base-line data on flock 
size and structure, husbandry practices and the main problems encountered by the farmers [1]. 
164
 
Based on the findings of the survey, interventions namely, vaccination against 
Newcastle disease and Fowl pox, control of parasitic infestations and improvement in the 
housing of the semi-scavenging chickens, were made on the same farms that were surveyed, 
for the purpose of improving poultry productivity. The interventions were made from June 
2001 to February 2002, and were repeated from October 2002 to March 2003, and on the 
reproductive performance, feeding practices and f eed costs, diseases, mortality, disposal of 
farm produce, and the benefits that the farmers derived from this activity, were investigated. 
As the interventions and investigations were limited to a small group of family poultry 
farmers, additional informati on was required to make an assessment of the social and 
economic importance of this system of poultr y production in Rodrigues. This survey was 
carried out on a larger group of households, an d from the whole island, in the months of 
November and December 2002, and also include d the poultry merchants who market the live 
chickens in Mauritius. The survey enabled to make an appraisal of the social and economic 
importance of the semi-scavenging chickens to Rodriguans, and the needs of both farmers and 
poultry merchants for improving further this side-activity. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The survey consisted of two parts namely , a socio-economic survey and a market 
survey, and was conducted in the months of  November and December 2002. 100 households 
who were rearing domestic chickens were ra ndomly selected from the whole island. The 
family poultry dealers who are around five in  number, and who are commonly known as 
“poultry merchants”, were also involved in the survey. 
Socio-economic survey 
A standard questionnaire was used, and each of those persons in the household who 
was responsible for the farming activity was interviewed at his residence for recording 
information. The information collected pertained to the following: 
• profile of farmer 
• management of the farm 
• production costs and revenue 
• problems and constraints 
• support services 
• environmental issues 
• prospects 
Market survey: 
Another standard questionnaire was used to interview the family poultry dealers. Four 
of the five merchants were interviewed in the month of December 2002 at their residence. The 
following information was collected from them: 
• profile of the poultry dealer 
• method of purchase  
165
 
• price determination 
• handling of chickens prior to export 
• export procedures 
• selling of chickens  
• problems, constraints and prospects in the marketing system. 
RESULTS 
Socio-economic survey 
Profile of farmer 
Sex 
68% of the respondents were males and 32% were females.  
Age 
The age of the respondents ranged between 14 and 81 years, with most of them being 
around 50 years. 
Marital status 
63% respondents were married and 17 were  single, of whom 6 were unmarried 
children of the family aged between 14 and 36 years. 
Status in the household 
68% of the respondents were heads of hous eholds and 26% were spouses, as shown 
below, in Table I.  
TABLE I. STATUS OF RESPONDENTS IN THE HOUSEHOLD. 
Status in household Number of persons (%) 
Head 68 
Spouses (females) 26 
Unmarried male children 
Total 
6 
100 
Out of the 68% of head of households, 11% were females. 
Number of members in the family 
The number of members in the family was in the range of 1 and 10 and was 4.5 on 
average. 
Occupation 
The respondents had varied types of oc cupation, with no special categories, and 
included government employees, farmers, labourers, and self-employed artisans. However, 23 
were housewives, 16 were planters and 14 were labourers. 
 
166
 
Educational Status 
42% of the respondents had ne ver attended school. 44% ha d education up to primary 
level, and 14% had attended secondary school. 
Income 
The approximate monthly income of the respondent was in the range of Mauritian 
rupees (MUR) 200 and MUR 8,200, and that of th e whole family was in the range of MUR 
1,500 and MUR 14,000. Over 50% of both resp ondents and families ear ned between MUR 
4,000 and MUR 8,000, as shown in Table II (1 US $ = 29 Mauritian rupees). 
TABLE II. MONTHLY INCOME OF THE RESPONDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES. 
Revenue (Rupees) 
Range 
Number of respondents 
(%) 
Number of families 
(%) 
200–2000 23 9 
2001–4000 18 16 
4001–8000 59 57 
8000–14000 - 17 
 
The income of the respondent was calcula ted to be on an average R 4112 per month, 
and the total income of the family including that of the respondent was R 5773 per month. 
Activities 
Apart from a full time job, animal farming was the main activity of 56% of the 
respondents, while crop far ming and fishing were the ma in activity of 37% and 7% 
respondents, respectively, as shown in Table III. 
TABLE III. ACTIVITIES OF RESPONDENTS. 
 Main activity 
Number of 
respondents (%) 
Second activity 
Number of 
respondents (%) 
Third activity 
Number of 
respondents (%) 
Animal farming 56 27 4 
Crop farming 37 28 0 
Fishing  7 2 2 
Tailoring 0 1 0 
Livestock farming activities 
Besides keeping family poultry, the responde nts reared cattle, sheep, goats and pigs, 
and in varying numbers, as given in Table IV. 
23% reared 18 head of sheep  
The estimated revenue of the previous year  obtained from each of these animals was 
on an average MUR 8,379, MUR 13,278, MUR 3680 and MUR 8,485 per farmer, 
respectively, as shown in Table IV. The average yearly revenue from livestock was calculated 
to be MUR 15333 per household. This represented 31% and 22% of the income of the farmer 
and of the family, respectively (Table IV). 
167
 
TABLE IV. LIVESTOCK OWNED AND REVENUE OBTAINED. 
 Number of 
animals 
Revenue obtained (2002) 
Species 
owned 
% 
farmers 
Range Average % farmers Range 
(rupees) 
Average 
(rupees) 
Cattle 54 1–25 4.6 15 2000–80, 000 13,278 
Sheep 23 1–90 18 7 2000–15, 000 8, 485 
Goats 33 1–70 6.1 5 2000–8000 3, 680 
Pigs 59 1–13 3.2 52 1200–26, 000 8,379 
 
Experience in family poultry production 
The farmers were keeping family chickens for one to 60 years. Their experience the 
rearing of domestic chickens was as follows: 
Number of years of experience % farmers  
1-5 21 
6-10 17 
11-20 15 
21-30 18 
31-40 18 
41-60 
Total 
11 
100 
 
It is to be noted that a fair share (21%) of the farmers had relatively fewer number of 
years of experience (1 to 5 years). 
Reasons for keeping domestic chickens 
As a first priority, 50% of the responde nts were keeping domestic chickens for 
generating income, while 43% reared them fo r their own consumption. Another 7% were 
keeping these either for cultural reasons or simply for leisure, as shown in Table V. 
TABLE V. REASONS FOR KEEPING FAMILY CHICKENS. 
Reasons Priority 1 
(% respondents) 
Priority 2 
(% respondents) 
Priority 3 
(% respondents) 
Source of income 50 35 4 
Own consumption 43 50 3 
Cultural 4 1 13 
Leisure 3 1 2 
Managing family poultry 
Sources of local chickens 
99% of the respondents maintained their flock of local chickens out of their own farm, 
while 1% purchased chickens from other farms when the need arose. 
 
168
 
Flock size and structure 
The number of local chickens on the farms was in the range of 5 and 204 and was 39.2 
on an average. The largest number of farms (70%) had between 10 and 50 local chickens, as 
shown below: 
No. of local chickens Number of farms 
< 10 3 
11-50 70 
51-100 20 
101-150 5 
>151 2 
Total 100 
 
Besides rearing local chickens the farmers also kept other species of fowl, as shown in 
Table VI.  
TABLE VI. FLOCK SIZE AND STRUCTURE. 
Type of fowl % farms Number of birdsRange Average number of birds 
per farm 
Local chickens 100 3922 5–204 39.2 
Broilers 37 419 2–35 12.6 
Layers 4 219 2–200 54.7 
Ducks 4 41 3–16 10.2 
Turkeys 2 12 1–11 6 
Housing 
50% of the respondents had a shelter for th eir chickens. The size of shelter ranged 
between 2 and 32 m 2 and was on an average 7.3 m 2. The chickens were housed permanently 
on 16% of the farms, while only night shelter was provided on 33% of the farms, and 3% of 
the farms provided shelter for brooding only. Th us, the chickens were kept in a free range 
scavenging system on the majority of farms. The farmers who had a shelter for their chickens 
had spent between MUR 100 and MUR 12, 000 and MUR 1112 on an average on the 
construction of the shelter, as shown in Table VII. 
TABLE VII. EXPENSES FROM THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SHELTER FOR THE CHICKENS. 
Number of birds Range of housing cost (MUR) Number of farms 
< 10 450 1 
11-50 200-6000 32 
51-100 100-12000 12 
101-200 200-700 4 
>201 600 1 
Feeding 
97 % of the respondents allowed their chicke ns including the chicks to roam around 
the house for scavenging. All of them gave supplementary feeds to the birds, and in different 
combinations. The supplements consisted of rice , concentrate, maize, sweet potato, and bread 
which were given on 84%, 62%, 44%, 6% and 1% of the farms,  respectively. The frequency 
169
 
at which these supplements were fed varied fr om farm to farm. Feed  costs also varied 
according to the number of birds, and the type  and frequency at which these supplements 
were given. The expenses that incurred on feed ing by the householders was in the range of 
MUR 76 and MUR 3,188, and was MUR 548 per household per month, on an average. The 
feeding practices and costs of feeding are given in Tables VIII and IX respectively. 
TABLE VIII. FEEDING OF SUPPLEMENTS TO THE CHICKENS. 
Frequency of feeding  
Daily 
(% farms) 
Occasionally 
(% farms) 
Seasonally 
(% farms) 
Concentrate 42 19 1 
Rice 80 1 3 
Bread 1 0 0 
Maize 16 9 20 
Sweet potato 0 0 6 
TABLE IX. COST OF FEEDING OF SUPPLEMENTS. 
Quantity fed (kg/mth) Cost (Rupees/month)  
Range Average Range Average 
Concentrate 2.5–225 43.7 23–2138 372 
Rice 5–150 12 25–855 180 
Bread - 12 - 120 
Maize 75–500 56.6 38–2500 331 
Sweet potato - 66 - 174 
Disease occurrence and measures taken to control disease on the farms 
76% of the farmers had experienced di sease problems on their farms during the 
current year. 59% of the farmers had experienced the problems in the dry season (July–
December). Infections diseases were the majo r disease problems encountered on the majority 
of farms. These infectious diseases were described on the basis of the signs of disease that the 
farmers had observed, as given in Table X. The farmers resorted both to veterinary drugs, 
which they obtained free from the veterinary  services, and traditional methods, for the 
treatment and control of those diseases in thei r flocks of birds. The treatments varied from 
antibiotics to kitchen oil, lemon juice, etc. as shown in Table X. 
TABLE X. DISEASE PROBLEMS AND TREATMENT GIVEN.  
Importance of the disease problem Treatment given Disease problem 
1* 
% farms 
2 
% farms 
3 
% farms 
4 
% farms 
 
Twisted neck 27 14 4 1 Antibiotics 
Paralysed legs/ 
drooping wings 
31 11 9 2 Antibiotics 
Respiratory diseases 68 29 13 9 Antibiotics 
Diarrhoea 31 7 6 9 Antibiotics, kitchen oil, lemon 
juice. 
Fowl pox 44 4 13 13 Iodine, tomato, kitchen oil,‘herbe 
martin’, shoe polish 
Lice/mites 5 1 2 0 Tabac marron 
* 1 to 4: Decreasing order of importance (1= highest; 4 = lowest) 
170
 
Losses of birds 
The farmers suffered loss of birds due to di sease, predation or were simply losing 
them in the open. Deaths due to disease occurred on 59% of farms. Disease was the main 
cause of their loss, and the deaths were more or less the same magnitude in adults, growers 
and chicks. Predation and getting lost while erring occurred mostly in chicks on 22% and 10% 
of farms respectively. The losses due to these various causes are given in Table XI. 
TABLE XI. LOSSES OF BIRDS IN 2002. 
 Adults Growers Chicks 
Cause of loss % farms Average 
 N /farm 
% farms Average 
N/farm 
% farms Average 
N/farm 
Disease 59 28.6 56 27.8 56 34.7 
Predation 2 15 4 17.7 22 14.6 
Lost 1 15 5 17.4 10 44.6 
 
The losses of birds due to disease in adults, growers, and chicks were calculated to be 
17.3%, 17.1% and 27.1% per farm, per year, respectively. 
Vaccination  
The majority of farmers did not vaccinate their chickens against the three most 
common and universally occurring diseases of economic importance as shown below. 
 Disease   Birds vaccinated (% farms)  
Newcastle disease   22% 
Fowl pox   17% 
Infectious bursal disease   1% 
Support Services 
The support that the farmers received were  namely, from the Veterinary Services, 
Extension service, and cooperatives, and were as follows:  
• 65% of the farmers had obtained veterinary aid  
• 31% had received advice from Extension Service 
• 75% were aware of the existence of cooperative societies 
• 18% farmers were members of a cooperative society 
• 84% expressed the need for a cooperative society  
The need for a cooperative society was expressed as follows: 
Need % farmers 
Increase knowledge of farming 81 
Availability of drugs 8 
Marketing facilities 4 
Availability of feeds 6 
Availability of chicks 2 
 
171
 
Disposal of chickens and eggs and income derived 
52% of the farmers indicated selling their fa rm produce, 46% were unable to sell, and 
2% were not selling. Chickens and eggs were both consumed and sold on 72% of the farms. 
The disposal of chickens and eggs during the previous month is given in Table XII. 
TABLE XII. DISPOSAL OF CHICKENS AND EGGS AND INCOME DERIVED.  
 Chickens Eggs 
 % 
farms 
Ave. no./ 
mth /farm 
Value¹ 
Rupees/ mth 
/farm 
% farms Ave. no./ 
mth /farm 
 
Value² 
Rupees/mth/farm 
Donations - - - 5 16 44 
Own 
consumption 
63 4.0 542 73 22 54 
Sold in the 
same village 
32 8.0 1,077 9 111 278 
Sold to 
merchants 
30 6.0 717 - - - 
1. Market value of 1 adult live chicken assumed at MUR 130 
2. Market value of 1 egg assumed at MUR 2.50 
Revenue from family poultry  
The monthly monetary value representing sale, donations and home consumption of 
chickens and eggs was in the range of  MUR 25 and MUR 8,101, and MUR 1,500 (US $ 52) 
on an average, per farm, whereas the revenue obtained from the sale of chickens and eggs was 
on average MUR 1,012 (US $ 35) per farm per mont h. The profit of that the farmer obtained 
through the sale of chickens and eggs, by subt racting the feed costs from the revenue, was on 
an average MUR 464 per month (US $ 16). This  profit represented 8.9 % of the monthly 
income of the farmer, and 12 % of that of the family.  
Environmental issues 
• 61% of the farmers did not dispose of chicken manure, 
• 38% utilized it for crop production, 
• 1% utilized it for making of compost, 
• 5% of farmers received complaints from neighbours because the birds caused 
nuisance to plantations. 
Fencing 
10% of farmers had a fence around their house which limited the movements of the 
chickens. 
Warning from environment enforcement authorities 
No farmer had received any warning from the police, sanitary or any other officer, 
regarding chicken rearing. 
 
172
 
Prospects in poultry farming 
66% of the farmers wished to expand their poultry farming activity. Out of these, 65% 
preferred to expand the farming of the ‘local’ chickens, 8% would go for broilers and 4% for 
layers. 44% of those who preferred to expa nd local chicken production believed that local 
chickens were more profitable than other type s while 36% believed that they were easier to 
manage, as shown in Table XIII. 
TABLE XIII. REASONS FOR EXPANDING POULTRY FARMING ACTIVITY. 
 Reasons (% farmers) 
Type of chicken % farms Market 
guaranteed 
More 
profitable 
For own 
consumption 
Resistant 
to disease 
Easily 
managed 
Local 65 12 44 - 1 36 
Broilers 8 - 40 60 - - 
Layers 4 - 100 - - - 
No preference 23 - - - - - 
 
23% of the farmers had no preference for any specific type of chickens. 
Major constraints limiting family poultry farming activity 
Disease was reported to be the major c onstraint of 58% of the farmers while 
inadequate veterinary and extension service, and high feed costs were constraints met by 17% 
and 13% of the farmers, respectively. Other minor constraints were lack of finance, 
inadequate housing, inadequate support from family members, lack of water, predation and 
inadequate fencing/shelter, amongst the remaining 12% of the farmers. 
Suggestions for improving family chicken production 
Farmers made suggestions in order to  improve family poultry production. These 
suggestions were as follows: 
Suggestions % farmers 
Family poultry production must be promoted 78 
Veterinary service must be improved 45 
Extension service must be improved 33 
Introduce similar improved breeds 8 
 Govt. subsidy in terms of leased land, fencing and feeds  34 
Type of chicken and egg preferred for consumption 
Egg: 93% respondents preferred to consume local eggs 
 4% preferred eggs from commercial layers  
  3% had no preference 
Chicken: 87% preferred to consume local chickens 
 9% preferred broilers 
 4% had no preference 
The majority of farmers associated their preference of the local chicken and egg to 
taste, as shown in Table XIV. 
173
 
TABLE XIV. REASONS FOR PREFERRING LOCAL EGGS AND CHICKENS. 
 Reasons 
Item Taste 
(% farmers) 
Nutritive value 
(% farmers) 
Obtained free of costs 
(% farmers) 
Eggs 76 20 4 
Chickens 87 13 - 
Market survey 
Marketing activity 
The marketing of family poultry was effected by specific individuals in the business, 
and were referred to as chicken traders or chicken merchants. It was a part-time activity of all 
the four respondents, their main activity bein g shop-keeping (75%) and restaurant keeping 
(25%). They were involved in marketing only family poultry. Their individual involvement in 
this activity ranged between 5 to 60 years. 
Purchase of local chickens 
Three out of the four chicken traders purch ased local chickens throughout the year, 
while one purchased at specific times when the order existed, and the purchases were timed 
with the schedule of the trips of the ship. 
All the chicken traders had only a verbal agreement with the farmers for the supply 
and purchase of chickens. The chicken traders went directly to 75% of the farmers for 
purchase, while 25% farmers brought their chickens to the middlemen. 
Three chicken traders had regular suppliers  (farmers). 60% of the purchase was from 
the regular farmers. 
Frequency of purchase 
Three chicken traders purchased chickens 1-2 times per month. One farmer purchased 
4 times per month. The latter would buy young growers and keep them until ready for sale. 
Number of birds purchased 
The number of birds purchased per month by the chicken traders was in the range of 
180 to 600 and was on average 360 birds/month. 
Price determination 
The price of the chicken was determined  on live-weight and not on appearance 
(colour) or sex, and the birds were weighed at purchase. The average weight of a live chicken 
was around 1.75 kg. The price ranged between Rs 60-80/kg live-weight and was on an 
average Rs.70/kg. The variation in the buying price occurred all year round. The price 
fluctuated more during festive occasions, su ch as end of year and Chinese New Year 
celebrations, when the selling price was highest. The price was mutually determined by both 
buyer and seller, but was usually by the merchant. 
 
174
 
Criteria used for purchasing chickens 
All the chicken traders used weight as th e first criterion, then age and appearance as 
the second criterion. They usually purchased al l the birds and did not select only the best 
ones. The reason being that the quality of the chickens was always the same. 
Handling of the chickens during purchase and handling costs 
The birds were transported in lorries or vans from villages at farm gate or at meeting 
points near the village. The birds were placed in crates made of wire netting. The costs 
incurred by the chicken trader for transportation was between Rs 300-500 per month. 
Selling of chickens 
Three of the four chicken traders were also retailers, and sold the chickens themselves. 
One had a relative as counterpart for retailing. The chickens were sold directly to consumers. 
They were exported live to Mauritius by ship. A negligible number of chickens was sold live 
to consumers in Rodrigues. 
Export of chickens live to Mauritius 
Three of the four chicken traders exported the chickens at a frequency of 1-2 times per 
month. One of them exported once every two months. 200-900 chickens were exported by 
chicken traders each month, and which represen ted 475 birds or 7 baskets on an average, per 
chicken trader per month. The birds were tran sported in the ship in baskets with around 60 
birds per basket. (Official Figures indicate  that around 26,100 chickens were exported on an 
average per year during the past 10 years, and sh owed a more or less constant trend) [2]. The 
ship takes around 36 hours to reach Mauritius. Pr ior to export, the chickens were kept during 
2 to 3 days in cages, at the premises of the chicken traders, the majority of whom reside at the 
small sea port town of Port Mathurin, and in the vicinity of the port. Recently, the authorities 
have urged the traders to keep their chickens at a specific place adjoining the port, being 
given that their neighbours had complained of foul odour. 
Losses 
2%-5% of death losses occurred prior to ex port. In addition, 1%-2% losses occurred 
during transportation by ship, and this was due to deaths and thefts. Baskets that were loaded 
last were more prone to thefts. 
Costs incurred for export by the chicken traders 
• In Rodrigues: 
• Labour and feeds prior to shipping: MUR 300-500 
• Permit: MUR 50 
• Water on board for birds: MUR 15-20 
• Freight charges per basket: MUR 420 
• The export of one monthly consignment of 475 birds (7 baskets) thus cost to the 
trader around MUR 3,500. 
 
175
 
In Mauritius: 
Three of the four chicken traders transported the chickens straight to the sale point in 
the Royal Street area of Port Louis, which is  in the heart of the city, and is commonly known 
as ‘China Town’, while one took them to a holding place in Roche Bois first, and then to that 
selling place. 
Transportation of the chickens was effected in lorries. Around MUR 300 were spent 
on transport and MUR 600-1500 were spent on labour. 
Point of sale 
Most of the birds were sold at Royal Street, City of Port Louis which is the capital of 
Mauritius, and the sale was usually over on the very day of their arrival. 
Selling price 
The selling price ranged between Rs 90-100/ kg live-weight, reaching the peak during 
festive occasions like end of year and Chinese New Year. Young birds especially cocks, 
fetched a higher price. 
Profitability  
This activity was profitable to all the chicken traders. They wished to expand the 
activity, as there was a promising market. 
Customers 
People from the Chinese community were the main consumers, with very few 
consumers from other communities. 
Problems and constraints faced by the chicken traders 
The chicken traders considered that:  
• Keeping the chickens at the Quay premises in Rodrigues one day before loading 
was not necessary, as they were residing quite near to the sea port. 
• Occasional thefts during transport by ship resulted in loss in revenue, and no 
compensation was given by the shipping company for such losses, as there was no 
system of insurance in place. 
• Freight charges were considered to be high. 
• There was no appropriate market place for the selling of the chickens in 
Mauritius. 
• They did not have any permit for selling the chickens. 
They were harassed by munici pal sanitary officers, and police officers, as they were 
allowed to sell the chickens for only one day. 
 
176
 
CONCLUSION 
• Family poultry production in Rodrigues, that is the rearing the so-called ‘local’ 
Rodriguan breed of chickens, was a side-activity that was carried out mainly by 
elderly male heads of household, spous es and housewives, whose families had 
around four members. 
• Excepting housewives, the heads of household and spouses who reared family 
poultry had as a main occupation (i) farming (ii) self-employed artisan (iii) labourer 
(iv) government employee (in decreasing order of numbers). Besides their main 
occupation, the family poultry farmers we re also engaged in other activities 
namely, (i) livestock farming (ii) crop farming, and (iii) fishing (in decreasing order 
of importance).  
• The poultry farmers were mostly uneducat ed or had some education at primary 
level, belonged to the low-income group, and had a few to many years of 
experience of family poultry keeping. 
• The farmers reared from a few to hundred s of the ‘local’ chickens, and they 
reared them firstly for the generation of additional income, and secondly for home 
consumption. A few persons also kept these chickens for cultural reasons or simply 
for leisure. 
• Besides rearing the ‘local’ chickens, more than one-third of the family poultry 
farmers also reared broiler chickens, mo stly for their own consumption. A few of 
them had layers, ducks and turkeys. The rearing of broilers was an indication that 
they liked to have more fleshy fowl and more rapidly. 
• Besides having poultry, a large number of the farmers reared pigs, cattle, goats 
and sheep (in decreasing order of importance), for a source of income. 
• Although 52% of the households had an artisanal chicken house, chickens were 
permanently housed on only 16% of the farms.  This resulted in a significant loss of 
birds due to environmental factors. Improving the housing of the chickens, 
especially for chicks, could reduce the loss.  
• Birds were allowed to scavenge in the open for feeding themselves on nearly all 
the farms (97% farms), but a large proportion of the farmers also gave 
supplementary feeds which were mainly rice (on 84% of the farms) and concentrate 
(on 62% of the farms), which were purchased. The concentrate feeds are meant for 
high-producing fowl like broilers and layers. Therefore, if the farmers were 
sensitized to make a judicious use of those concentrates, their returns would have 
increased. 
• Diseases, especially of infectious origin, occurred on a majority of farms, and 
were the main causes of deaths and t hus, economic loss. Since only 22% and 17% 
of the farmers were vaccinating their fl ocks against Newcastle disease and Fowl 
pox, respectively, efforts ought to be en gaged in having all the family chickens 
vaccinated against these diseases. 
• The majority of farmers expressed th e need for a cooperative society and 
increased support, for improving their know-how on poultry farming. Extension 
thrust could, therefore, help in improving their farming activity.  
• Chickens and eggs produced were consum ed and sold on the majority of farms, 
and the farmer was making a profit whic h represented around 12 % of the income 
177
 
of the family. This indicated that family poultry production was of economic 
importance to them. This furthermore explains why a majority of farmers wished to 
expand the activity of rearing ‘local’ chickens. 
• The majority of farmers believed that the rearing of the ‘local’ chickens was 
more profitable and easier to manage than broilers or layers (commercial improved 
breeds), but land, fencing and feed cost was high.. This activity could therefore, be 
promoted if adequate support could be give n to them in terms of lease of land, 
subsidies on feeds and on fencing materials. 
• The majority of farmers preferred the ‘l ocal’ chicken and egg for consumption, 
especially for their taste. This was an indication of the social importance of these 
chickens. 
• The major constraints that limited family poultry farming activity were namely, 
poultry diseases, inadequate veterinary and extension service and high feed costs. 
These could be overcome by vaccination a nd other disease cont rol measures, and 
support from Government. Housing of y oung birds, improvement of chicken 
houses and fencing would also help in reduc ing losses due to deaths and predation, 
and make family poultry production more environment friendly. 
• Family poultry has a promising market especially within the Sino-Mauritian 
community in Mauritius. There is a need for educating farmers to improve the 
quality of their ‘local’ chickens so as to satisfy consumer demand. Provision of a 
suitable market place in the vicinity of ‘C hina Town’ would enable easier sale of 
the chickens. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are thankful to the Animal Producti on and Health Section, Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division, International Atomic Energy Agency, for technical and financial support. 
REFERENCES 
JUGESSUR, V.S., and SEENEVASSEN PILLAY , M.M., (2002). Family Poultry Production 
in Mauritius: Problems and prospects. p 65–71. In Characteristics and parameters of 
family poultry production in Africa. Results of a FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research 
Programme. IAEA –TECDOC. Vienna, 2002. 
ANON. 2002. Export of selected commodities (quan tities) to the Island of Mauritius. p 19. In 
Digest of Statistics on Rodr igues (2001). Central Statistical Office, Ministry of 
Economic Development, Financial Services and Corporate Affairs 
178
 
IMPROVING FARMYARD POULTRY PRODUCTION ON SMALLHOLDER 
FARMS IN MAURITIUS  
V.S. JUGESSUR¹, M.M. SEENEVASSEN PILLAY¹, M.J. ALLAS² 
¹Agricultural Research and Extension Unit, Food and Agricultural Research Council, 
Quatre Bornes, Mauritius 
²Agricultural Services, Citronelle, Rodrigues, Mauritius 
Abstract 
 A rapid expansion of the industrial production of broilers and eggs during the past decades 
has reduced family poultry production to an insignificant side-activity in Mauritius, the main island of 
the Republic of Mauritius. In contrast, the latter system of production continues to be an important 
farming activity both for the generation of additional income and for home consumption, for most of 
the inhabitants of Rodrigues, the second biggest island of the Republic. A recent survey that was 
undertaken on selected farms on both islands enabled the identification of the problems that the family 
poultry farmers were facing, and the prospects in th at area. Interventions were made accordingly to 
address the main problems for improving farmyard production, on the same households, and on both 
islands. The interventions were made in two phases between June 2001 and March 2003, and 
consisted of providing a low-cost housing for the birds, vaccination of the flocks against Newcastle 
disease and Fowl pox, and the control of parasitic infestations. Farm productivity was monitored 
during the intervention period and the effectiveness of the interventions was assessed. Results showed 
that the farmer obtained an additional return of 4.2 in Mauritius and 6.0 in Rodrigues, on a yearly 
basis, for every additional dollar that was invested on vaccinations and endoparasitic control. Housing 
of chicks brought an additional return of 0.6 per farm. Survivability rate of chicks till the age of six 
weeks was 50% in Mauritius and 52% in Rodrigues, respectively. A mortality rate of around 43% was 
recorded on vaccinated as well as on unvaccinated flocks against Newcastle disease, and on both 
islands, although no clinical case of the disease was reported during the interventions. Parasitic 
infestations due to helminthes, coccidia, lice and mites were effectively controlled after a single 
prophylactic treatment with commonly used drugs. 
Key words: Family poultry, semi-scavenging, interventions, improvement, Mauritius. 
INTRODUCTION  
The production trend of poultry meat and eggs has been increasing in the Republic of 
Mauritius during the last decades, with an increa se in the number of industrial farms, thereby 
maintaining self-sufficiency for these co mmodities in the country. The poultry industry 
presently produces around 30000 tons of broiler m eat in order to meet the demand of the 1.2 
million inhabitants and of around 700,000 tourists who visit the island every year. This 
flourishing poultry industry has caused the rearing of semi-scavenging family poultry to 
become an insignificant side-activity in Mauritius, the main island of the Republic, in contrast 
to Rodrigues, the second bigger one, with  a population of 35,000, and situated 595 km. away, 
where agricultural farming and artisanal fishing are the main activities of the inhabitants.  
The major problems that the family poultry farmers have been facing were highlighted 
in the results of a survey that was carried out  in 1999 and repeated in 2000 [1]. These were 
described as competition from the industrial farms in Mauritius, while inadequate veterinary 
and extension support, and poor housing and management, were the main ones on the island 
of Rodrigues. 
Based on these results, interventions were made on the same households that were 
surveyed in both Mauritius (Zone I) and Rodrigues (Zone II), with a holistic approach for 
179
 
improving family poultry productivity. The interventions comprised a vaccination programme 
against Newcastle disease and Fowl pox, in troduction of a low-cost chicken house and 
improvement of the existing ones, and the control of parasitic infestations through medication. 
The interventions were undertaken in two phases, from June 2001 to March 2002 (Phase 1) in 
both zones, and were repeated from October 2002 to March 2003 (Phase 2) in Zone II, 
Rodrigues. During the interventions farm pr oductivity was monitored for obtaining data on 
the flock size and structure, feed cost, reprodu ction, mortality, and sa le and consumption of 
chickens and eggs. The revenue derived and th e profit and return that the farmer obtained 
from the sale of adult birds was calculated. Faecal examin ation was undertaken for the 
identification of helminthe parasites and to assess the effect of the anthelmintics and 
anticoccidians on endo-parasitic infections . Blood was collected for the detection of 
haemoparasites, and for the conduc tion of serological tests to a ssess the effectiveness of the 
vaccination programme against Newcastle disease. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Selection of farms 
The same households with family poultry that were randomly selected and surveyed 
[1], were retained for the interventions. 12 households were involved in Mauritius (Zone I) 
and 15 in Rodrigues (Zone II), respectively. These were divided in a Treatment group and a 
Control group as shown in Table I. 
TABLE I. SELECTION OF FARMS FOR MAKING INTERVENTIONS. 
No. of farms Zone I – Mauritius Zone II – Rodrigues 
Treatment 8 10 
Control 4 5 
Total 12 15 
Interventions at farm level 
The interventions on the farms consisted of the following: 
•  Introduction of a low-cost housing for the chickens. 
• A vaccination programme against Newcastle disease and Fowl pox. 
• Control of parasitic infections 
Materials for the construction of a shelter for the chickens, vaccines, and drugs and 
were given free of charge to the farmers. The interventions were made simultaneously in both 
zones in a first phase - Phase 1 (June 2001 to May 2002), and were repeated in a second phase 
– Phase 2 (October 2002 to March 2003), only in Rodrigues, and on the same farms. All the 
three interventions were made on the Trea tment group, whereas there was no vaccination 
against Newcastle disease in the Control group. 
In Phase 2, three farms were dropped out, due to the unwillingness of the farmers to 
continue to participate in the project. In this  phase, the farms were divided into a Treatment 
group of eight farms where chicks were housed day and night, and a Control group of four 
farms where no birds were housed at all, and all the birds were allowed to roam and scavenge 
in the yard. 
180
 
Farmers were trained to vaccinate their birds themselves and to maintain records on 
record sheets that were given to them. A calen dar of the on-going activities was kept on all 
the farms during the intervention periods, and the activities were monitored through weekly 
visits in Phase 1 and on monthly visits in Phase 2. 
The interventions that were undertaken during the two phases are given in Table II. 
TABLE II. INTERVENTIONS ON THE FARMS. 
Phase 1 (June 2001 to May 2002) 
 
Zone I & II 
Phase 2 (October 2002–March 2003) 
 
Zone II only 
Interventions Treatment C ontrol Treatment Control 
Vaccination 
against ND 
-Day 1¹ flock 
-All D.O.C² 
-Re-vac of flock 
every 3 months 
Day 1¹ only -Flock 
-All D.O.C 
-Re-vac of flock 
every 3 months 
-Flock 
-All D.O.C 
-Re-vac of flock every 
3 months 
Vaccination 
against fowl pox³ 
Chicks at 
21 days 
Chicks at 
21 days 
Chicks at 
21 days 
Chicks at 
21 days 
Endoparasitic 
control 
Once every 3 
months 
Once every 3 
months 
Once every 3 
months 
Once every 3 months 
Improvement of 
housing³ 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Ectoparasitic 
control³ 
 
No 
 
No 
 
Yes 
 
Yes 
Chicks housed 
permanently 
No No Yes No 
1: Start of vaccination programme, June 2001 
2: Day old chicks 
3: As from 1
st September 2001 
Interventions - Phase 1 
The interventions and scientific investigations were as follows: 
Vaccination against Newcastle disease 
The flocks were vaccinated with locally available freeze-dried, thermostable NDV4 
vaccine, presented in vials of 200 doses. The farmer s were asked to store the vaccine at +2 to 
+8° C. The application of vaccine was demonstrated to the farmers. The programme of 
vaccination was as follows: 
Treatment group 
All Day old chicks: 1-2 drops by the intra-ocular route, by means of a dropper 
supplied, and after reconstitution of one vial in 10 ml of water.  
Rest of flock:  Day 1, that is, on 1 st June 2001, via drinking water. The vaccine was 
reconstituted by diluting one vial with 1.5 litres of previously bo iled and cooled water, or in 
commercial mineral water.  
Re-vaccination of flock:  3 months after the first vacci nation, that is on 01 September 
2001, and then subsequently, at regular intervals of three months. 
181
 
Control group 
Flock: Day 1 only, via drinking water. 
Vaccination against Fowl pox 
All chicks on both Treatment and Control farms were vaccinated at 21 days of age as 
from 1 st September 2001, intra-dermally, by the th igh prick method, with vaccine obtained 
from the Veterinary Services, in vials of 50 doses each. Farmers stored the vaccine at + 2 to + 
8° C. 
Control of endo-parasitic infestations 
A prophylactic treatment was given to th e flock for controlling helminthes and 
coccidian parasites on the farms, in both Treatment and Control groups, at regular intervals of 
three months, as follows: 
Control of helminth parasites 
Piperazine chlordydrate with 36% as pipe razine base was administered once to the 
flock, at the rate of 1 g/ litre of drinking water. In the treatment group, the drug was 
administered 3 weeks before each vaccination of the flock against Newcastle disease. 
Treatment was repeated at regular intervals of three months and over a period of one year. On 
farms where flocks would be found to be highly infested, the treatment would be repeated at 3 
weeks after the initial application. 
Control of coccidian parasites 
21.3% Sulphadimidine in combination with 2.6% Diaveridine was administered to the 
flock at the rate of 1 g / litre of drinking water. The treatment was given one week after 
administration of the anthelmintic, and following this schedule, it repeated at regular intervals 
of three months over a period of one year. 
Collection and examination of faecal samples 
2 to 3 fresh faecal samples of around 4 g each were collected from the ground on each 
farm before the administration of the anthelmintic, once every three months, for the detection 
of endo-parasitic helminthes eggs and coccidian  oocysts. A total of 72 and 97 samples were 
thus collected from Zones I and II respectively, during the interventions. Where faecal 
analysis was not possible on the same day the samples were stored in the refrigerator at + 2 to 
+ 8
° C and was analysed on the following day. Qualitative examination of the samples was 
carried out using the Simple Flotation Techni que as described by Benbrook et al., 1961 [2], 
Permin and Hansen, 1998 [3], and Troncy et al, 1981 [4]. 
Introduction of a low-cost housing for the chickens 
A low-cost 10 ft x 10ft and 8 ft high chicken shelter was designed. The purpose of the 
shelter was to enable four hens to lay eggs and incubate them, and pr ovide protection to the 
chicks in inclement weather, until six weeks of age. Construction materials were distributed 
free of charge to the farmers, and these were according to the characteristics of each zone, as 
follows: 
182
 
• Zone I (Mauritius):20 wooden poles, 5 corrugated iron sheets and 50 feet of wire 
mesh. 
• Zone II (Rodrigues):24 wooden poles, 20 ‘L atanier’ leaves and 50 feet of wire 
mesh 
The shelter was partly covered, had an  open space, was on bare ground, and was 
constructed by the farmer himself in his farmyard. 
Monitoring of farm productivity 
All the households were visited at the end of each month, for the collection of 
production data, using data entry forms. Data was collected from the farmers for the first three 
months as from June 2001 before the start of  the intervention programme. Further data was 
collected after the start of the intervention pr ogramme, for seven consecutive months in Zone 
I and for six consecutive months in Zone  II, respectively, as from September 2001. 
Information was collected as follows: 
• Number of cocks, hens, growers and chicks. 
• Number of birds and eggs consumed or donated. 
• Number of birds that died 
• Types and quantity of feeds used and feed costs. 
• Other expenses incurred and purpose. 
• Revenue obtained from the sale of chickens and eggs. 
Calculation of revenue (income), and partial budgeting 
Before the intervention programme: 
• Treatment and Control farms: The costs before the pr ogramme had started were 
the expenses that the farmer would incu r (as all items were provided free) on a 
single vaccination against Newcastle diseas e and the labour cost for vaccination. 
The income of the farmer was the money obtained by the sale of cocks, hens, and 
growers.  
After the intervention programme 
• Treatment farms:  The costs of the programme were the expenses the farmer 
would incur on vaccinations against New castle disease and Fowl pox, the labour 
cost for vaccinations, and the cost of drugs. The income of the farmer was the 
money obtained by the sale of cocks, hens, and growers.  
• Control farms: The costs of the programme were the expenses the farmer would 
incur on vaccination against Fowl pox and the labour cost for vaccinations, and the 
cost drugs. The income of the farmer was the money obtained by the sale of cocks, 
hens, and growers.  
 
 
183
 
Determination of reproductive performance of the birds 
Four randomly selected laying hens on each  farm were leg-banded and monitored for 
their individual reproductive pe rformance and the following information was collected as 
from June 2001. 
• Number of eggs laid 
• Number of eggs incubated 
• Number of chicks hatched and date of hatching 
Chicks that were hatched from the four he ns were followed for a period of six weeks 
to determine chick survivability at the end of the six weeks. 
Blood collection and serum preparation 
2.5 to 3 cc of blood were collected from six adult birds on each farm, and serum was 
separated from the whole blood after keeping the syringe upright in the fridge at +2 to + 8° C 
overnight. The serum was then stored at –20° C. 
Serum was prepared from blood collected fro m birds in both Treatment and Control 
groups as follows: 
Treatment farms  
• 1st collection: Before distribution of vaccines and one week before the start of 
vaccination programme (Pre-vaccination). 
• 2nd Collection: 45 days after first vaccination. 
• 3rd Collection: 90 days after the second vaccination (re-vaccination), that is, 180 
days after the start of the vaccination programme.  
Control farms 
• Blood was collected before the single v accination, and then at 45 and 180 days 
following the only vaccination that was given to the flocks. 
Serological tests 
Serological tests were c onducted on 549 serum samples, by the Indirect Enzyme 
Linked Immunoassay (ELISA) technique, for the detection of chicken antibodies to 
Newcastle disease virus. The Bench Protoc ol Version - NDV 1.01 of August 2002 supplied 
by the International Atomic Energy Agency was used. 
Detection of haemoparasites 
Blood smears were made from the blood of two birds on each farm at the time of 
blood collection once every 3 months. A total of  162 smears were made and examined for the 
detection of haemoparasites after staining with  Giemsa stain as described by Benbrook and 
Sloss, 1961 [2].  
Interventions - Phase 2 
Phase 2 extended over a period of 6 months  in Zone II (Rodrigues), from October 
2002 to March 2003, and the interventions were made  on 12 of the same farms of Phase I, as 
184
 
three farms had dropped out. The farms were di vided into a Treatment group of eight farms 
and a Control group of four farms, respectively, as shown in Table II.  
The interventions of Phase 1 namely, vacci nation against Newcastle disease and Fowl 
pox, control of parasitic helminths and coccidia were maintained. The anthelmintic and 
anticoccidian used in Phase 1 were each substituted by another one. A broad spectrum 
anthelmintic with Levamisole base and an anticoccidian with Amprolium base were 
administered to the flocks, at the rate of 1 g/ litre of drinking water, once every three months. 
Faecal samples were collected and examined once every three months before administration 
of the anthelmintic. 60 faecal samples were collected and analysed by the Simple Flotation 
Technique. 
An insecticide with Carbaryl base (86%) under the trade name of Sepou, from 
Coophavet Co. Ltd. was administered in broodin g hens or flocks whenever lice or mites 
affected them, by spray, at the rate of 4.5 g / 2 litre of water. The chicken house was utilised 
for laying, hatching and brooding on the Treatment farms.  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Flock size and structure 
Phase 1  Zone I (Mauritius) 
At the beginning of the interventions in June 2001, the number of chickens on the 
farms was in the range of 14 and 95, and on an average 38.3 per farm. At the end of ten 
months, the number of chickens ranged be tween 20 and 85 and was on an average 41.4 per 
farm as shown in Table III. 
TABLE III. FLOCK STATUS IN ZONE I — MAURITIUS. (JUNE 2001–MARCH 2002) 
Average number of  
birds/ farm 
Cocks Hens Growers Chicks 
June 2001 7.1 14 9.9 7.1 
March 2002 6.0 19.3 9.6 6.3 
Dead over a period of 10 months 1.6 2.8 9.5 24.5 
Sold over a period of 10 months 1.5 0.6 0.8 0 
Consumed over a period of 10 mths 3.8 1.6 10 0 
 
Zone II (Rodrigues) 
At the beginning of the interventions in June 2001, the number of chickens on the 
farms was in the range of 10 to 488 and an aver age 91.8 per farm. At the end of nine months, 
the number of chickens ranged between 27 an d 430, with an average of 92.1 per farm as 
shown in Table IV.  
TABLE IV. FLOCK STATUS IN ZONE II — RODRIGUES. (JUNE 2001–MARCH 2002) 
Average number of  
birds/ farm 
Cocks Hens Growers Chicks 
June 2001 3.21 18.5 28.1 41.9 
March 2002 3.14 21.8 39.1 28.1 
Dead over a period of 9mths 0.8 2.3 5.2 117 
Sold over a period of 9mths 0.3 6.0 26.7 0 
Consumed over a period of 9mths 2.1 28.0 0 0 
185
 
The evolution of the flock structure throughout the period of nine months is illustrated 
in Fig. 1. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
Month
Number of u n
chicks growers hens cocks total
 
FIG. 1. Evolution of the flock structure (Phase 1 – Zone II) 
In both Zones I and II, the number of adult co cks and hens was rather stable compared 
to that of chicks and growers, as they were kept for breeding purposes. The variation in the 
number of growers was mainly due to these bein g sold at different periods, while that of 
chicks was due to periodic hatching and mortality throughout that period. 
The ratio of adult cock to hen per farm was 1 to 3 in Zone I and 1 to 6.3 in Zone II 
(compared to an average of 3.8 for the African  countries), as quoted by Goodger et al, 2002 
[5]. It was thus inferred that more young males were sold as compared to hens, which were 
kept for reproduction. Besides, young cocks fetched a better price than the other birds. 
Flock size and structure : Phase 2 - Zone II Rodrigues 
At the beginning of October 2002 the number of chickens on the 12 farms was in the 
range of 15 and 151, and on an average 96.8 per farm. At the end of the six months, in March 
2003, the number of birds on the farms was in th e range of 5 to 75 and was on an average 
53.6 per farm. The drastic drop in the number of  birds in March 2003 was due to losses of 
birds owing to a cyclone which hit the isla nd during that month. The flock status and 
structure, and the evolution of the flocks dur ing the six months’ period are given in Table V 
and 5 A, and illustrated in Fig. 2. 
TABLE V. FLOCK STATUS IN ZONE II. (OCTOBER 2002 TO MARCH 2003) 
Average no. of birds / farm Cocks Hens Growers Chicks 
October 2003 3.25 21.5 31 56.9 
March 2003 2.3 11.8 26.4 28.8 
Dead over a period of 6 months 3.2 11.3 45.1 87.9 
Sold over a period of 6 months 1 15 56.3 0 
Consumed over a period of 6 months 11.8 24 0 0 
 
The ratio of adult cock to hen was 1 to 6.3, as in Phase 1. More cocks were consumed 
in Phase 2. Sales of hens and growers were also relatively more in Phase 2. 
186
 
TABLE V. EVOLUTION OF THE FLOCK STRUCTURE. (OCTOBER 2002 TO MARCH 2003)  
Month Ave. number of birds per 
farm Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mch. 
Cocks 3.6 3.3 3.3 3.1 2.8 2.7 
Hens 21.5 20.1 19.1 17.1 2.5 1.6 
Growers  28.6 29.9 40.1 26.5 44.9 26.4 
Chicks 56.9 36.4 59.9 57.77 51.3 22.2 
Flock average 96.8 72.0 98.6 88.5 104.7 53.6 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
O c tN o v  D e c J a n F e bM c h
Month
Number of units
cocks hens growers chicks total
 
FIG. 2. Evolution of flock structure- Zone II (October 2002 – March 2003) 
Housing 
All the farmers in both zones utilized the materials given to them for the construction 
of a chicken house or for improving the exis ting ones during Phase I. 75% of the farmers 
constructed a chicken house as was designed, as  shown in Fig. 3. The remaining 25% of the 
farmers in both zones utilized them for improving the existing shelters, making provision 
especially for laying, and brooding. However, the birds were allowed to roam in the farmyard 
for scavenging in both zones in Phase 1. The house was put to use on all the farms in 
September 2001. All brooders were housed at ni ght in both zones. Growers and adults 
perched partly in the house, but mostly outsi de, on trees and shrubs. In the sixth month of 
Phase 2 in Zone II, 75% of the chicken houses were completely blown down during a strong 
cyclone. 
 
187
 
 
FIG. 3. Low cost chicken house in Zone II 
Mortality 
No disease outbreak of disease was reported  during the study in both zones, and in 
both Phases; Newcastle disease was notably absent. 
Phase 1: Mortality was mostly in young chicks and in both zones, as shown in Tables 
III and IX. The causes of deaths in the chicks  were mainly predati on and stress conditions. 
Sporadic deaths due to Fowl pox occurred on tw o farms in Zone II. The mean mortality rates 
of birds on the farms in the Treatment and Control groups were 43.7 ± 8.9% and 45.3 ± 5.8 % 
respectively in Zone I, and were 40.5 ± 17.6% and 45.2 ± 9.1% respectively, in Zone II. 
Phase 2: Mortality during the six months of the second phase in Rodrigues was 47.9 ± 
37.7% and 9.3 ± 5.4% in the Treatment and Control groups respectively  (Table VI). No 
disease outbreak was reported, but  a large number of birds died during a cyclone in the last 
month of the interventions. 
TABLE VI. MORTALITY OF BIRDS ON THE FARMS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Number of farms 
 
Mortality (%)  Phase Zone Farms 
Range Mean S.D 
T (8)¹ 35.1–57.9 43.7 8.9 I-Mauritius 
C (4) 38.1–51.8 45.3 5.8 
T (10) 16.4–75.0 40.5 17.6 
Phase 1 
II-Rodrigues 
C (5) 35.7–58.1 45.2 9.1 
T (8) 9.3–53.4 47.9 37.7 Phase 2 II-Rodrigues 
C (4) 4.3–17 9.3 5.4 
188
 
Reproductive performance of the birds 
After monitoring the  reproductive performance over a period of 10 months in Zone I 
and for 9 months in Zone II, it was found that a hen had on an average four clutches per year 
(as compared to an average of three for African  countries (Goodger et al, 2002) [5]. 13 to 14 
eggs were laid in one clutch, 10 to 13 eggs we re set for incubation, and 8 to 10 chicks were 
hatched. Eggs from different hens were ofte n mixed for incubation, and farmers avoided 
setting their eggs in winter. They claimed that incubated eggs get spoilt during cyclonic 
weather. 
Hatchability was found to be 75% in Zone I and 81% in Zone II on average (Table 
VII). 
TABLE VII. REPRODUCTIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE ‘LOCAL’ CHICKENS. 
Zone I Zone II Average 
T C T C 
No. of clutches/hen/year 4 4 4 4 
Number of eggs laid 14 ( 1.2)¹ 14 (3.5) 13 (2.6) 13 (1.4) 
Number of eggs incubated 12 (2.4) 10 (1.1) 13 (3.9) 12 (1.6) 
Number of eggs hatched 9 ( 1.3) 8 (0.5) 11 (4.6) 10 (1.3) 
Hatchability (%) 75 (7.5) 80 (8.0) 84 (7.9) 83 (4.0) 
¹ Standard deviation 
Survivability of chicks 
In Phase 1, the chicks were monitored fo r six weeks from their hatching date, as 
during this period they are most fragile and very susceptible to diseases and predators. It was 
found that in both Zones I and II and on both Treatment and Control farms, the rate of 
mortality decreased with the age of the chicks, and was getting stabilized after six weeks, as 
shown in Fig. 3.The mean mortality rates duri ng the first six weeks of age in the Treatment 
and Control groups were 27.3 
± 23.6% and 45.3 ± 5.8 % respectively in Zone I, and 36.4 ± 
21% respectively in Zone II. 
At the age of 6 weeks, survivability rate was 50% and 52%, in the Treatment groups in 
Zone I and II respectively, compared to 44% and 24% in the Control groups, respectively 
(Table VIII). The survivability of the chicks from hatching to six weeks of age in both zones 
is illustrated in Fig. 4. 
TABLE VIII. SURVIVAL RATE OF CHICKS FROM HATCHING TO SIX WEEKS OF AGE. 
 Survival rate (%) 
 Age (wks) 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Zone I T 77 73 66 58 54 50 
 C 62 55 50 50 47 4 
Zone II T 91 80 72 60 56 52 
 C 86 70 50 35 26 24 
 
189
 
 
FIG. 4a Chicks survival rate from hatching to six weeks of age 
 
FIG. 4b. Chicks survival rate from hatching to six weeks of age 
Feeding and costs of feeding 
In both Phase I and Phase 2 and in both Z ones I and II, the birds were allowed to 
scavenge on all the farms. While scavenging, the birds ate mainly grass, insects and worms, 
which were moderately available throughout the year. They were also given supplements like 
concentrate, rice, maize, bread and sweet potatoes. Concentrate was fed on 83 % of farms in 
Zone I and on 100 % of farms in Zone II as shown in Table IX. 
The percentage of farms that gave the diffe rent types of feeds in both zones and in 
each phase is given in Table IX. The contribution of the different feed types in the feed cost in 
each zone is illustrated in Figures 7 and 9, respectively. 
TABLE IX . FEEDING PRACTICES AND CONTRIBUTION OF DIFFERENT FEED TYPES IN 
THE FEED COST. 
 Phase 1 Phase 2 
Feed type Zone I Zone II Zone II 
 % Farms Contribution to 
feed cost % (Av)
% 
Farms 
Contribution to 
feed cost % (Av)
% Farms Contribution to 
feed cost % (Av) 
Concentrate 83 79 100 62.4 100 80 
Rice 41 12 93 24.2 25 7.7 
Maize 8 5 53 9.5 41.6 9.7 
Bread 33 4 27 4.0 8.3 2.2 
190
 
The feeding practice was quite different in the two phases, but the contribution of the 
different feeds in the feed cost was nearly the same. There was a decrease in the feeding of 
rice which is normally the cheapest feed, both on the number of farms and in its quantity, in 
Zone II during Phase 2, but at the same time, the feeding of concentrate was maintained on all 
the farms. The contribution of concentrate in the feed cost was thus increased to 80%. 
62,4
79
4
424,2
12
9,5 5
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Rodrigues Maurit ius
Zone
Percentag e Maize
Rice
Bread
Concentrate
 
FIG. 5. Contribution of different feeds in the feed cost-In Zones I and II (Phase 1) 
Contribution of feed to feed cost
80.0
2.2 7.7 9.7
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
conc bread rice maize
Fe e ds
Percentage
 
FIG. 6. Contribution of different feeds in the feed cost -Zone II, Phase 2. 
Cost of feeding (Phase 1) 
The amount of money spent yearly by farmers on feeds was in the range of Mauritian 
rupees (MUR) 712 to MUR 24,694 with an average of MUR 6,673 in Zone I, and MUR 2,063 
191
 
to MUR 23,625 with an average of MUR 7,084 in Zone II, respectively. The contribution of 
the different feeds in the feed cost is illustrated in Fig. 5.  
Cost of feeding (Phase 2) 
The amount of money spent yearly by farmers on feeds in Phase 2 in Zone II 
(Rodrigues), was in the range of MUR 740 to MUR 18,4 00 with an average of MUR 5,547. 
The contribution of the different feeds in the feed cost is illustrated in Fig. 6.  
Disposal of chickens and eggs 
Cocks, hens and growers as well as eggs  were both consumed and donated on almost 
all the farms and in both zones. Chickens and eggs were sold on 50% of farms in Zone I. The 
eggs were sold to neighbours while chickens were sold to itinerant salesmen.  
In Zone II chickens and eggs were sold on 80% and 46% of the farms, respectively. The eggs 
were sold in the same village, while chickens were sold mostly to itinerant poultry merchants. 
The poultry merchants exported these ‘local’ Rodriguan chickens live by ship to Mauritius. 
26,100 of these birds were exported on an average each year to Mauritius during the past 
decade (Fig. 7) (Anon, 2001) [6]. 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Year
No. of bird
 
FIG. 7. Export of chickens live to Mauritius 
Revenue, profit, and return obtained as a result of interventions 
An assessment of the economic performance of the farms was made by calculating the 
‘return’ of the farmer. The additional income that was derived as a result of the interventions 
was the difference between the income obtained after the interventions less the income that 
was obtained before the intervention programme started. The profit was the additional income 
minus the intervention costs, and the ‘retu rn’ obtained was the profit divided by the 
intervention costs. The criteria that were used in the calculation of the return were as follows: 
• Input was all additional expenses related to the intervention programme namely, 
costs of vaccines, anthelmintics, anticoccidians, insecticide and vitamins, and cost 
of labour for vaccination. 
• The output was the income that was ge nerated from the number of cocks, hens 
and growers that were sold as a result of the interventions. 
192
 
• Assumptions were used, viz: 
• A cock, a hen, and a grower represented 1.5, 1.0 and 0.75 unit respectively.  
• The average assumed market value of a cock, hen and grower was MUR 193, 
130 and 98, respectively (1 US $ = 29 Mauritian rupees)  
• The unit value of a chicken that wa s sold, donated or consumed was MUR 130 
on an average. 
• The unit market value of egg sold, donated or consumed was MUR 2.50 on an 
average 
• As the calculation of retu rn obtained requires data for 12 months, the available 
data was standardized to a period of one year. 
• In Phase 2, the total revenue that the farmer obtained from farm produce was 
calculated taking into account the following : 
• The‘cash’ income was that derived from the sale of chickens and eggs 
• The non-cash income was the monetary  value of donations and home 
consumption of chickens and eggs 
• The total revenue of farmers who utilized the chicken house for brooders was 
compared to that of those farmers who did not utilize it for this purpose.  
• The cost of materials for the chicken house as well as cost of construction, 
vaccination, and drugs made up the total costs of the interventions. 
• The feed costs were included in the expenses for computing the profit and return 
of the farmer.  
• The element of depreciation of the chicken house valued at 5% annually.  
Return obtained and partial budgeting 
Phase 1 Zone I (Mauritius) 
Treatment farms 
The total average costs of the intervention programme per farm per year were $ 10.7, 
as compared to $ 6.5 before the programme was implemented. The average additional income 
that was generated with the sale of adult bi rds as a result of the programme was $ 56.1 per 
farm per year, and the annual average return wa s calculated to be $ 4.2 for every dollar that 
was invested. 
Control farms 
The total average costs with vaccination against Fowl pox and the control of 
endoparasites, but without a vaccination progra mme against Newcastle disease, was on an 
average $ 8.8 per farm per year, as compared to $ 1.4, when only a single vaccination against 
Newcastle disease was given before the interventions. The income that was generated at the 
end of this intervention was on an average, $ 14.9 per farm per year. The return was on an 
average 0.7 per year.  
Phase 1 Zone II (Rodrigues) 
Treatment farms 
The total costs of the intervention programme were on an average $ 10.7 per farm per 
year, as compared to $ 6.5 before the programme. The average additional income that was 
193
 
generated from the programme was $ 74.8 per farm per year. The annual return was 
calculated to be on an average 6.0 per farm pe r year, for every dollar that was additionally 
invested. 
Control farms  
The total average costs with vaccination against Fowl pox and the control of 
endoparasites, but without a vaccination progra mme against Newcastle disease, was on an 
average $ 8.6 per farm per year, as compared to $ 1.6, when only a single vaccination against 
Newcastle disease was given before the interventions. A loss of $ 20.7 per farm per year was 
registered, and a loss of $ 3.4 occurred for every dollar that was invested. 
A summary of the return or loss sustained by the farmers in both zones is given in 
Table X. 
TABLE X. RETURN ON INVESTMENT WITH THE INTERVENTION PROGRAMME. (PHASE 
1: JUNE 2001 TO MARCH 2002) 
Income from sale 
of adult 
birds/farm/yr 
(US $) 
Zone Farms 
Before 
int. 
After 
int. 
Add. income 
generated from 
the 
prog./farm/yr 
(US $) 
Intervention 
costs /farm/yr¹ 
 
(US $) 
Profit/ 
farm/yr 
(income) 
 
(US $) 
Return/fa
rm/yr 
 
(US $) 
T²(n=8) 32.5 88.6 56.1 10.7 45.4 4.2 
 
I C³(n=3) 32.9 47.8 14.9 8.8 6.1 0.7 
T(n=8) 26.9 101.7 74.8 10.7 64.1 6.0 II 
C(n=4) 112.1 91.4 - 20.7 8.6 - 29.3 - 3.4 
1. - Costs of ND and Fowl vaccines, Labour costs to give vaccines, Antiparasitic drugs on 
Treatment farms 
- Costs of Fowl vaccine, Labour costs to give vaccine, Antiparasitic drugs on Control farms 
2. Treatment farms 
3. Control farms 
 
Phase 2, Zone II – Rodrigues 
 Farm income and return after interventions including housing of chicks 
Treatment farms 
On the treatment farms where the chicken house was utilised by brooding hens and 
chicks, the total costs of the interventions , including housing and depreciation on housing, 
vaccination, anthelmintic, anticoccidian, insecticide, amounted to $ 79 per year, on an 
average. The income derived from the sale of adult birds was $ 126. The profit was thus, $ 47 
and the return was 0.6, for every additional dollar invested in the programme. 
Control farms 
On the Control farms where the brooding hens were left free in the yard, $ 45 was 
obtained from the sale of adult birds, while the costs of the interventions were $ 79. Thus, the 
farmer made on an average a loss of $ 34 per ye ar, and lost 0.43 on every dollar invested in 
the programme.  
194
 
A summary of the return or loss sustained by  the farmers in both zones in Phase 2, is 
given in Table XI. 
Overall monetary value obtained from farm produce 
Treatment farms 
The value of chickens and eggs that were  consumed and donated amounted to $ 128, 
and the income derived from the sale of adult birds was $ 126. Considering the cost of feeds 
which was on an average $ 101.7 per farm, and the costs of interventions, the farmer obtained 
on an average, a yearly net monetary value of $ 73.3 from farm produce.  
TABLE XI . FARM INCOME WITH THE HOUSING OF BROODING HENS AND CHICKS. 
(PHASE 2 ZONE II — RODRIGUES)  
 
Cost of interventions 
Total 
int. 
Costs 
Profit 
 
Return 
 
Farms 
Sale of 
adult 
birds  
(US $) Item 
 
Cost 
US ($) 
 
(US $) 
 
(US $) 
 
(US $) 
ND vaccine 1.8 
Fowl pox vaccine 0.7 
Labour cost to give vaccines 4.7 
Anti-parasitic drugs 8.4 
Housing (materials, construction 
and maintenance) 
 
60.8 
Treatment (n=6) 
(Brooders housed) 
 
 
 
 
126 
Depreciation 3.0 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
0.6 
ND vaccine 1.8 
Fowl pox vaccine 0.7 
Labour cost to give vaccines 4.7 
Anti-parasitic drugs 8.4 
Housing (materials, construction 
and maintenance) 
 
60.8 
Control (n=4) 
(Brooders not 
housed) 
 
 
 
 
45 
Depreciation 3.0 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
 
- 34 
 
 
 
 
- 0.43 
 
Control farms 
The value of chickens and eggs that were  consumed and donated, amounted to $ 124, 
and $ 45 was obtained from the sale  of adult birds. Considering the cost of feeds which was 
on an average $ 147 per farm per year, and the co sts of interventions, the farmer lost on an 
average, a monetary value of $ 57 per year. 
Parasitic infestations 
Effect of the anthelmintic and anticoccidian on endoparasitic infestations 
Phase 1. 
Examination of faecal samples before the first administration of  the anthelmintic 
“Piperal” and the anticoccidian “Anticoc” in Phase 1 revealed that birds on 25% of farms had 
a low infestation (+) with helminthes parasites of Ascaridia galli, and that birds on 33% of 
farms had a low (+) infestation with coccidia of Eimeria species, in Zone I. In contrast, in 
Zone II, besides a low infestation with coccidia on 20% of farms, there was a high infestation 
(+++) with Strongyloides avium 
195
 
Examination of faecal samples three months after two successive administration of the 
drugs revealed that there was no re-infestation with endoparasites in Zone I. A low level of re-
infestation with the helminthe parasites Strongyloides avium  and Heterakis gallinarum  was 
observed on 6% and 26% of farms respectively, after the second application of the drugs in 
Zone II. A low level of re-infestation with Strongyloides avium  however, persisted after a 
second application, as shown in Table XII. 
TABLE XII . RESPONSE OF FLOCKS TO TREATMENT WITH ANTHELMINTIC AND 
ANTICOCCIDIAN. 
Phase 1- Zone I Phase 1 -Zone II Period 
(months) 
Species 
Infection 
rate* 
% farms
Species 
Infection 
Rate 
% 
farms 
0 
Ascaridia galli 
Coccidia 
+ 
+ 
25 
33 
Asccaridia galli 
Heterakis gallinarum 
Strongyloides avium 
Syngamus trachea 
Coccidia 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+ 
+ 
6 
26 
13 
6 
20 
3 Nil 0 
 
100 H. Gallinarum 
Strongy loides avium 
+ 
+ 
26 
6 
6 
 
Nil 
 
0 
 
100 
Strongyloides avium + 
 
6 
 
*+   Low   No haemoparasite was detected in the blood smears made in any of the two zones. 
++   Mild          +++  High                 Nil  No infection 
 
Phase 2. 
The monitoring of endoparasitic control in Phase 2 in Zone II, Rodrigues, by the 
application of another anthelmintic “Levalap” and anticcidian “Amprol” and faecal 
examinations revealed occasional re-infestation with Ascaridia galli on 6% of farms after the 
first treatment, and no re-infesta tion by helminthes or coccidian parasites on any farm at the 
third and sixth month. 
Piperal and Anticoc were substituted by Levalap and Amprol respectively in order to 
avoid the development of drug resistance by the parasites. 
Effect of insecticide on ectoparasitic infestations  
A low level (+) of ectoparasitic infestation with lice was observed on 20% of farms in 
Zone 1, while a moderate level (++) was obser ved on 46%of farms in Zone II. The lice were 
identified as Menopan gallinae species. Deaths due to lice infestation was reported on two 
farms in Zone II during Phase 1. 
Farmers were reported to have utilized Carbaryl on brooding hens whenever the need 
arose. Lice infestation was not detected during visits. This wa s an indication that lice and 
mites were being effectively controlled. 
Response of birds to vaccination 
Vaccination against Newcastle disease 
The majority of farmers did not vaccinate their day old chicks by the intra-ocular route 
in the treatment groups, as they found it difficu lt. Instead, they vaccinated them via drinking 
196
 
water by reconstituting one vial of 100 doses of the vaccine in about 200 ml of water. They 
often vaccinated the chicks when they were several days old.  
Owing to cyclonic conditions, electricity supply was cut o ff for several days in both 
zones. Thus, both vaccines and reagents were exposed to room temperature which could have 
reached up to 30 ºC. 175 samples were found to be contaminated and were discarded. 
Immunity status of the birds before the vaccination programme started 
Serological tests showed that prior to th e start of the vaccination programme (Pre-
vaccination), the birds were having a level of antibodies against Newcastle disease virus in 
the range of 8.2% to 26.4%, and a mean of 16.1 ± 5.2% in Zone I. In Zone II, the level was in 
the range of 13.6% to 19.2%, with a mean of 16.0 ± 2.7%. When the birds were divided into 
Treatment and Control groups for the interventio ns, the birds in the Treatment group showed 
a mean antibody level of 16.2 ± 5.2, and a mean of 15.6 ±2.7 in the Control group in Zone I, 
while In Zone II it was 16.6 ±1.8 and 15.6 ±3.1 in the Treatment and Control groups 
respectively. 
Immunity status of the birds 45 days post-vaccination 
Control group: 
After around 45 days following a single flock vaccination serological tests revealed 
that the birds had produced anti bodies against Newcastle disease virus in the range of 26.6% 
to 59%, with a mean of 38.6 ± 17.7% in Zone I, and was in the range of 13.8% to 28.5%, with 
a mean of 18.2 ± 5.9% in Zone II. 
Treatment group: 
After around 45 days of the first vaccination of flocks by the oral route, and also of all 
hatched chicks in the Treatment groups, the level of antibodies produced were on an average, 
34.6 ± 9.2% in Zone I, with a peak of 50.2%. In Zone II it was on an average, 29.6 ± 9.5%, 
with a peak of 40.8% 
Immunity status of the birds 90 days post-vaccination 
Control group: 
After around 90 days following re-vaccination, that is, 180 days after start of the 
vaccination programme, the mean levels of antibodies detected were 17.3 ± 3.2% and 19.9 ± 
4.7% in Zones I and II, respectively. 
Treatment group: 
The mean levels of antibodies detected were 17.3 ± 3.2% and 19.9 ± 4.7%, with peaks 
of 30.7% and 40.7%, in Zones I and II, respectively. 
It was observed that the level of antibodies in the sera of birds from the control groups 
of both zones were much lower than those in the treatment group, as shown in Table XIII.  
It was also observed that by vaccinating a flock of birds against Newcastle disease once every 
three months and by the oral route, an adequa te level of immunity wa s not achieved, as the 
minimum level of antibodies to resist an attack of the disease was benchmarked at 30%. 
 
197
 
TABLE XIII. ANTIBODIES PRODUCED AGAINST NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS. 
 Pre-vaccination* 
% Antibodies 
45 days Post 
Vaccination 
90 days Post 
Vaccination 
Range Mean Range Mean Range Mean  
Treatment 8.2–26.4 16.2 
(5.2)** 
24.4–50.2 34.6 
(9.2) 
11.1–30.7 18.6 
(5.0) 
 
Zone I 
Mauritius 
Control 8.6-22.2 15.6 
(2.7) 
26.6–59 38.6 
(17.7) 
13.4–21.6 17.3 
(3.2) 
Treatment 14.0-19.1 16.6 
(1.8) 
14.9–40.8 29.6 
(9.5) 
16.8–40.7 24.4 
(7.4) 
Zone II 
Rodrigues 
Control 13.6-19.2 15.6 
(3.1) 
13.8-28.5 18.2 
(5.9) 
16.6–23.3 19.9 
(4.7) 
*Before the start of vaccination programme ** Standard deviation 
The response or the birds to vaccination in both zones is illustrated in Fig. 8. 
Vacci nal  r esponse -  Zone I
16.2
34.5
18.5
15.6
38.7
17.2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
pre vac 45 days
post  vac
90 days
post  vac
Peri od (days)
% antibodies
Treatment Control
Vacci nal  r esponse -  Zone I I
16. 6
29. 6
24. 4
15. 6 16. 2
18. 5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
pre vac 45 days post
vac
90 days post
vac
Peri od ( days)
% antibodies
Treatment Cont rol
 
FIG. 8. Response of the birds to vaccination against Newcastle disease  
 
198
 
Vaccination against Fowl pox 
Fowl pox was reported to occur sporadically on only two farms in Zone II, and during 
Phase 1 only. Sporadic deaths of chicks occurred on those farms. 
CONCLUSION 
• A low-cost housing was essential especially  for hens to incubate eggs, and for 
chicks to be protected from predators and environmental hazards thereby increasing 
the survivability of chicks. As cyclones are always a threat to low-cost poultry 
shelters the present one needs to be  consolidated, but would require more 
investment on the part of the farmers. However, the farmers should not confine 
their chickens permanently, as these birds are semi-scavenging ones. 
• Farmers should limit the feeding of commercial concentrate feeds to their laying 
hens and chicks, and should utilize cheaper supplements like rice, maize and green 
vegetables, in order to reduce their feeding cost. A reduction in the feeding cost 
would increase their return. 
• Parasitic infestations were not of major importance as the birds controlled these 
naturally. However, a systematic prophylactic treatment against both endoparasites 
and ectoparasites would further reduce the risks of re-infestations.  
• Although no outbreak of these diseases  was reported during the intervention 
periods in both zones, and no clinical cases were reporte d, vaccination of family 
poultry against Newcastle disease and Fowl pox must be maintained. 
• The vaccination programme was relativel y effective, although an optimum 
immunity against Newcastle disease was not conferred to the birds through 
vaccination. This could be attributed to a decrease of potency of some reagents as 
well as of vaccines, as these were exposed to temperatures exceeding room 
temperature for several days, as a result of power cut during cyclonic weather. The 
vaccination programme against Newcastle disease would have been more effective 
if the farmers had vaccinated their individua l birds by the ocular route, as this 
method of vaccination is known to be more effective.  
• Family poultry production was not of importance in Mauritius, whereas it was of 
importance in Rodrigues for its contri bution towards the home consumption of 
chicken and egg, and in the generation of additional income to the farmer.  
• The constant trend of the export of th e “local” Rodriguan chickens live to 
Mauritius during the past decade was an indi cation of a guaranteed market for this 
commodity in Mauritius. There was, therefore, a need to provide adequate support 
to the family poultry farmers so that th ey could increase their farmyard poultry 
production.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are thankful to the Animal Producti on and Health Section, Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division, International Atomic Energy Agency, for Technical and Financial support. 
 
 
199
 
REFERENCES 
[1] JUGESSUR V.S., and SEENEVASSEN PILLAY, M..M., (2002). Family Poultry 
Production in Mauritius: Problems and prospects. p 65–71. In Characteristics and 
parameters of family poultry production in Africa. Results of a FAO/IAEA 
Coordinated Research Programme. IAEA–TECDOC - xxx. Vienna. 
[2] BENBROOK, E.A., SLOSS, M.W., Verinary Clinical Parasitology (1961) 240 pp. 
[3] PERMIN A and HANSEN JW. 1998. Epidemiology, diagnosis and control of poultry 
parasites, FAO Animal Health Manual. Rome 
[4] TRONCY, P.M., ITARD, J., MOREL, P.C., Precis de parasitologie veterinaire tropicale 
(1981) 233–237. 
[5] GOODGER, W.J., BENETT T.B., and DWINGER, R.H., (2002). Comparative analysis of 
family poultry production in twelve African countries. p 148. In Characteristics and 
parameters of family poultry production in Africa. Results of a FAO/IAEA 
Coordinated Research Programme. IAEA-TEC-DOC-. Vienna. 
[6] ANON. 2002. Export of selected commodities (quantities) to the Island of Mauritius. p 19. 
In Digest of Statistics on R odrigues (2001). Centra l Statistical Offi ce, Ministry of 
Economic Development, Financial Services and Corporate Affairs. 
200
 
A GUIDE TO IMPROVE FAMILY POULTRY PRODUCTION IN 
MAURITIUS 
V.S. JUGESSUR¹, M.M. SEENEVASSEN PILLAY¹, M.J. ALLAS² 
¹Agricultural Research and Extension Unit, Food and Agricultural Research Council, , 
Quatre Bornes, Mauritius 
²Agricultural Services, Citronelle, Rodrigues, Mauritius 
INTRODUCTION 
In order to produce a guide for farmers in Mauritius, key issues of backyard poultry 
production were discussed and the following short version of recommendations was compiled 
to be used in a leaflet for farmers.  
Guide for improved backyard poultry production 
Smallholder poultry farmers in Mauritius and Rodrigues can increase the production 
of their ‘local’ chicken and egg, and see th eir return increase by taking the following 
measures: 
• Vaccination of their birds  
• Control of parasitic infestations in their flock of birds 
• Provision of a shelter to their chickens  
Vaccination 
The birds have to be vaccinated against two very important diseases caused by viruses, 
namely against Newcastle disease and Fowl pox. Both diseases usually affect chickens in the 
dry winter season. Newcastle disease can kill almost all the birds on the farm, while Fowl pox 
affects young birds.  
Farmers can vaccinate their birds as follows: 
Vaccination against Newcastle disease 
The vaccine used commonly is the NDV 4 vaccine, which can be obtained from any of 
the district veterinary centres. The vaccine is in a powdered form, and is presented in vials. 
One vial contains 200 doses, and is  meant for 200 birds. It is presently sold at Rs.5.25 a vial. 
It must be carried in a thermos flask preferably and stored at +2 to +8º C in the refrigerator, if 
not used immediately. 
Vaccination schedule: 
• All day old chicks: 1-2 drops of vaccine diluted in about 20 ml. of water, in the 
eye, by means of a dropper (intra-ocular route) 
• Rest of flock: Reconstitute one vial in 1.5 litres of previously boiled and cooled 
water, and give for drinking in the morning. 
• Revaccination: Repeat vaccination of the flock regularly once every three 
months 
201
 
Vaccination against Fowl pox: 
The vaccine is obtained in 50 and 100 doses at Rs.5.25 for a vial 100 doses. Vaccinate 
all chicks at 21 days of age, in the thigh by di pping a needle in the va ccine vial and pricking 
the skin. The vaccine must be carried in a thermos flask preferably and stored at +2 to +8º C 
in the refrigerator, if not used immediately. Vaccinate twice a year. 
Control of parasitic infestations 
Worm infestation: 
Give a broad spectrum anthelmintic in drinking water once every three months. This is 
easily available from Drug stores Follow the instructions of the manufacturer so as to give the 
correct dose. 
Lice and Mite infestation: 
Spray an insecticide in the chicken house, or on individual infested birds during brooding. 
Provision of a shelter to their chickens  
Construct a shelter for the chickens, especially  for chicks as it is important to protect 
them during the night. The eggs can be hatched in the house. The chicks should be kept in the 
shelter till six weeks of age. The chicks should be fed creep feed after separating them from 
the hen. 
202
 
EFFECTS OF FEEDING, HOUSING AND ANTIPARASITIC TREATMENTS 
IN IMPROVING FREE RANGE CHICKEN PRODUCTION IN MOROCCO 
F. KICHOU, M. BOUSLIKHANE 
Institut Agronomique et Veterinaire Hassan II, Rabat, Morocco 
Abstract 
The objective of this work was to determine the effects of feeding, housing and anti-parasitic 
treatment on the improvement of family poultry production in Morocco. Eight free range chicken 
flocks were partitioned into 2 groups; «intervention» and «no intervention» flocks. In “Intervention” 
flocks, locally made brooders and poultry houses were provided, the birds received supplementary 
feeding and were subjected to anti-parasitic treatment against endo-parasites and ecto-parasites. Both 
categories of flocks were vaccinated against Newcastle disease and Gumboro disease. Data relative to 
flock size and structure, mortality, egg production, chicken and egg sales, sale prices, feed 
consumption were collected at a bi-weekly to monthly basis from July 2002–July 2003 and were 
subjected to appropriate statistical comparisons of proportions and means. Flock size and structure and 
flock and egg production was significantly improved in «intervention» flocks. Mortality of young 
birds (Chicks and cockerels/pullets) in «intervention» flocks was significantly lower than in «no 
intervention» flocks. The cost-benefit analysis has shown that «intervention» flocks have made better 
profit. The mean relative profit (output/input ratio) in «intervention» flocks was 3.65 and only 2.55 in 
«no intervention» flocks. These results indicate that the performed interventions had an overall 
beneficial effect on the studied parameters. 
INTRODUCTION 
Moroccan poultry production plays a vital role in narrowing the animal protein 
supply-gap (Benabdeljalil, 1997). Most of this production is fulfilled by the commercial 
sector which is concentrated around large urban areas. The remote areas rely mainly on small-
scale poultry and traditional family poultry production.  
Family poultry or the so locally called “Bel di poultry ” is an integrated component of 
nearly all rural households. Besides providi ng valuable proteins, it generates incomes 
particularly to women the main managers of Moroccan family poultry. Despite this, it is very 
precarious and permanently threatened by diseases such as Newcastle disease (NCD) and 
Gumboro disease (Bell J.G. 1986, Mouloudi S. 1987, Kichou F. 
et al. 2002a). Previous results 
from field surveys have shown that free range chickens in Morocco experience heavy losses 
through mortality mainly among young chicke ns (infectious diseas es and predators, 
malnutrition and underfeeding, parasitic infestation particularly with ecto-parasites, and poor 
housing conditions (Kichou F. et al., 2002b).  
The purpose of this work was to evaluate  the economical benefits of interventions 
triggered in order to improve family poultr y production in Moroccan conditions such as 
feeding, housing and anti-parasitic treatment. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
Flocks 
Eight free ranging chicken flocks were chosen, according to the cooperation of owners 
and easy access, in a village from a remote area north-west of Morocco. The flocks were 
203
 
partitioned into 2 groups: a 1st group of 4 «intervention» flocks (with interventions) and a 2nd 
group of 4 «no intervention» flocks used as controls (with no interventions). The flock size 
and structure of these study flocks are summarized in Table I. 
TABLE I. FLOCK SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF STUDY FLOCKS. 
cockerels/pullets Groups/Flocks 
2-5 
months 
5-7 
months 
total 
Hens Cocks 
I  16 0 16 14 8 
II  4 0 4 9 5 
III 0 10 10 18 7 
IV  8 0 8 4 2 
Total 28 10 38 45 22 
«intervention» 
flocks Mean 7 2.50 9.50 11.25 5.25 
V  2 0 2 7 2 
VI  0 8 8 6 3 
VII  6 7 13 8 1 
VIII 9 0 9 6 1 
Total 17 15 32 27 7 
«no 
intervention» 
flocks Mean 4.25 3.75 8 6.75 1.75 
Interventions 
“Intervention” flocks were subjected to the following interventions: 
Brooders: 
Brooders were locally made using reed, a locally available material. They were 
designed by our research team and made by a local craftsman (Figs. 1 & 2). Each farm 
received three of these brooders for chicks rear ing. First plan was to separate chicks from 
their dam and put them into the brooders but af ter the experiment started it was difficult to 
keep the chicks away from the dam and to convince the farmers to do it this way for the 
whole brooding period. So we were obliged to keep the brooding hens together with their 
chicks. Each brooding hen and chicks were kept in the brooders during the evening and 
during the day they were given feed and then freed by the farmer to go out and look for extra 
feed by themselves over a period of eight weeks. At this age, the chicks were considered as 
pullets and cockerels and freed with the rest of the flock.  
 
204
 
 
FIG. 1. Chickens near by Locally made brooders 
 
 
FIG. 2. A hen with her chicks in a brooder 
Housing: 
Poultry houses were made out of wooden stic k, wire mesh, plastic  and zinc shelters 
and installed on the farms (Fig. 3). Commercial dr inkers and feeders (used for broilers) were 
purchased and made available for the chickens within the brooders and the houses.  
205
 
 
FIG. 3. Chickens getting feed near by poultry houses 
Feeding  
Feed was purchased from a local feed mill and given to farmers to be distributed to the 
chickens as follow: 
• Chicks were given mash feed ad libitum  during the whole period of brooding 
until 8 weeks of age. The brooding hen was given approximately 25 g of pellet feed 
daily. The amount of feed distributed was recorded by farmers. 
• Ranging chickens aged over 2 weeks were given feed supplement only during 
the period of scarce range feed resources from October 1, 2002 to March 30, 2003. 
In each farm, the amount of feed was calculated to give for each chicken the 
equivalent of 25 g per day of  pellet feed considering that the daily requirement of 
an adult chicken is about 100 g/day (Anonymous, 1993). 
Anti-parasitic treatment against 
• Endoparasites using anthelmintic drugs twice. First tr eatment in September and 
the second treatment in February prior to vaccination. 
• Ectoparasites 3 times during the warm periods: July-august 2002 and June-July 
2003. Birds, houses and premises were thoroughly sprayed with an acaricide. 
Vaccination against Newcastle disease and Gumboro disease:  
In order to protect both «intervention» and control flocks from outbreaks of NCD and 
Gumboro disease, they were all vaccinated as follow:  
206
 
• Vaccination against NCD was performed three times in all categories of birds 
(young and adult chickens) in Sept ember 2002, December 2002 and March 2003, 
using a live vaccine by eye drops. 
• Vaccination against Gumboro disease was performed in newly hatched chicks, 
growers and adult chickens using a live vaccine by eye drops. In order to reach 
maximum coverage and protection of birds, it was applied 4 times during the study 
period corresponding to the brooding pe riods: September and November 2002 and 
March and April 2003.  
The partition of interventions is summarized in Table II.  
TABLE II. PARTITION OF INTERVENTIONS. 
Anti-parasitic treatments Vaccination Groups/Flocks Housing Feeding 
endoparasites ectoparasite s NCD Gumboro disease 
intervention  + + + + + + 
no intervention - - - - + + 
Data collection  
Data relative to flock size and structure,  mortality, egg producti on, chicken and egg 
sales and sale prices, feed c onsumption were collected at a bi-weekly or monthly basis from 
the period of July 2002–July 2003. 
Statistical analysis: Data were subjected to a ppropriate statistical comparisons of proportions 
and means. 
RESULTS 
Flock size and structure 
Flock size and structure of th e investigated flocks at the beginning and the end of the 
experiment are depicted in Table III. Mean nu mber of cockerels/pullets, hens and cocks in 
«intervention» flocks were 9.5, 11.25 and 5.25, respec tively. At the end of experiment they 
were 2.50, 11.25 and 2.75. Mean number of cocker els/pullets significantly increased to reach 
25 birds, whereas there was no change in mean number of hens and cocks. In «no 
intervention» flocks the mean number of cockerels/pullets, hens and cocks at the beginning of 
experiment were 8, 6.75 and 1.75 birds, respectively. But, these Figures did not significantly 
change at the end of the experiment. 
 
 
 
207
 
TABLE III. FLOCK SIZE AND STRUCTURE OF THE INVESTIGATED FLOCKS AT END AND 
BEGINNING OF EXPERIMENT. 
Number of cockerels/pullets Groups/ 
Flocks 
Periods  
2-5months 5-7 months total 
Number 
of Hens 
Number 
of Cocks
Total 28 10 38 45 22 
at start (July 
31, 2002) Mean 7 2.50 9.50 11.25 5.25 
Total 56 44 100 40 11 
Intervention 
at end (July 29, 
2003) Mean 14 11 25 10 2.75 
Total 17 15 32 27 7 at start (July 
31, 2002) Mean 4.25 3.75 8 6.75 1.75 
Total 26 18 44 21 4 
no intervention 
at end (July 29, 
2003) Mean 6.50 4.50 11 5.25 1 
Flock production  
Cockerel/pullet, hen and cock production wa s expressed as the mean number of birds 
produced per hen present a year (Table IV). Mean cockerel/pullet produced per hen present in 
«intervention» flocks was significantly higher than in «no intervention» flocks (P=0.01). 1.9 
cockerel/pullet per hen present in «intervention» flocks versus 0.7 cockerel/pullets per hen 
present in «no intervention» flocks. Similar pattern was found for hen and cock production 
but without any significant difference.  
TABLE IV. COCKEREL/PULLET, HEN AND COCK PRODUCTION. 
cockerels/pullets Cocks Hens Groups/ flocks Number o f 
hens 
present a 
year 
Total 
produced 
produce
d/ hen 
present 
Total 
produced 
produced/ 
hen 
present 
Total 
produced 
produced
/ hen 
present 
I 14.5 64 4.42 5 0.35 3 0.21 
II 8.1 23 2.83 9 1.11 9 1.11 
III 11.4 25 2.19 25 2.19 12 1.05 
IV 4.1 13 3.13 6 1.45 12 2.89 
«intervention» 
Mean 9.5 31.3 3.1 11.3 1.3 9.0 1.3 
V 7.3 9 1.23 2 0.27 1 0.14 
VI 5.4 6 1.11 4 0.74 1 0.19 
VII 6.5 0 0.00 8 1.23 5 0.77 
VIII 4.0 4 1.00 2 0.50 3 0.75 
«no interven-
tion» 
Mean 5.8 4.8 0.8 4.0 0.7 2.5 0.5 
Mortality 
Chick mortality 
Chick mortality is given in Table V. In « intervention»  flocks mortality of chicks 
varied from 18 to 25% with a mean  mortality rate of 20%. Whereas, in «no intervention»  
208
 
flocks, mortality was significantly higher and reached 66% with a mean mortality rate of 56% 
(P=0.01). 
Cockerel/pullet mortality 
Cockerel/pullet mortality is represented in Table VI. This mortality varied from 4% to 23% in 
«intervention» flocks and from 23% to 34% in «no intervention» flocks. The mean mortality 
rate «intervention» flocks (17%) was significantly (P=0.01) higher than that in «no 
intervention» flocks (41%). 
TABLE V. CHICK MORTALITY. 
Groups/flocks Total number of 
present chicks 
Number of dead birds Mortality rate 
I 118 25 21% 
II 61 11 18% 
III 113 22 19% 
IV 51 13 25% 
«intervention
» Total & mean 343 71 20% 
V 74 41 55% 
VI 58 38 66% 
VII 39 17 44% 
VIII 36 13 36% 
«no 
intervention» Total & mean  207 109 56% 
TABLE VI. COCKEREL/PULLET MORTALITY. 
Groups/flocks Mean 
Cockerels/Pullets 
present a year 
Number of dead birds Mortality rate 
I 29.7 3.0 04% 
II 16.4 9.0 23% 
III 28.4 15.0 22% 
IV 16.1 7.0 18% 
«intervention
» Mean 22.7 8.5 17% 
V 5.4 8.0 61% 
VI 8.9 8.0 37% 
VII 10.6 5.0 19% 
VIII 9.5 11.0 48% 
«no 
intervention» Mean 8.6 8.0 41% 
 
Mortality of adult chickens 
 
Despite the mortality among hens and cocks seemed to be higher in 
«no intervention» 
flocks (Table VII) we can not conclude of any significance regarding the small number of 
adult birds present in the studied flocks. 
 
 
 
 
 
209
 
TABLE VII. ADULT BIRD MORTALITY. 
Hen mortality Cock mortality Groups/flocks 
Mean of 
hens present 
a year 
Number of 
dead birds 
Mortality rate Mean cocks 
present a 
year 
Number of 
dead birds 
Mortality 
rate 
I 14.5 1 07% 3.0 1 33% 
II 8.1 0 00% 2.1 0 00% 
III 11.4 4 35% 5.6 0 00% 
IV 4.1 0 00% 1.5 0 00% 
«intervention
» Mean 9.5 1.3 10% 3.1 0.25 08% 
V 7.3 5 68% 1.0 0 00% 
VI 5.4 1 19% 2.2 0 00% 
VII 6.5 0 00% 1.0 0 00% 
VIII 4.0 2 50% 1.1 1 93% 
«no 
intervention» Mean 5.8 2.0 34% 1.3 0.25 23% 
 
Egg production 
Egg production in «intervention» and «no intervention» groups is depicted in Table 
IX. Mean number of total eggs produced in «intervention» group and «no intervention» group 
was 1767 and 807 eggs, respectively. Mean number of total eggs produced per hen present in 
the first category of birds (188 eggs/hen present) was significantly (P=0.01) higher than that 
in the second category of flocks (141 eggs/hen present).  
Table VIII. 
GLOBAL EGG PRODUCTION. 
Groups/flocks Mean number of hens 
present 
Total number of eggs 
produced 
Mean number of eggs 
produced/hen 
I 14.5 2753 190 
II 8.1 1445 178 
III 11.4 2014 177 
IV 4.1 854 208 
«intervention» Mean 9.5 1767 188 
V 7.3 950 130 
VI 5.4 874 162 
VII 6.5 832 128 
VIII 4 574 144 
«no interven-
tion» 
Mean 5.8 807 141 
 
During the study period, the evolution of egg production expressed as mean of eggs 
produced per hen present and per week is represented in Fig. 4 and Table X. From September 
2002, egg production has shown a continuous decrease until January 2003 in both 
«intervention» and «no intervention»  flocks. This decrease was more significant in «no 
intervention» flocks (P=0.01). From February egg production started to increase to reach 
similar level in both categories of birds; 4.2 and 4.1 eggs in «intervention» and «no 
intervention» flocks, respectively. Then it has drastically decreased in all flocks coinciding 
with a chicken pox outbreak during April 2003 (35-37 weeks of study period; Fig. 5. before to 
increase again during the last months of the study period in both categories of flocks. 
 
210
 
TABLE IX . THE EVOLUTION OF EGG PRODUCTION DURING THE WHOLE STUDY 
PERIOD. (JULY 2002JULY 2003) 
Weeks in period  Periods 
of 
survey  
Mean eggs 
produced/hen/week 
«intervention» flocks «no intervention» 
flocks 
P1 :  31/7-04/09 5.0 5.1 3.7 
P2 :  4/9-25/9 3.0 3.1 1.1 
P3 :  25/9-16/9 3.0 1.9 0.7 
P4 :  16/9-30/10 2.0 1.9 0.9 
P5 :  30/10-8/11 1.3 2.3 0.7 
P6 :  8/11-27/11 2.7 3.0 1.1 
P7 :  27/11-11/12 2.0 3.5 1.5 
P8 :  11/12-26/12 2.1 3.4 1.5 
P9 :  26/12-8/1 1.9 3.4 1.9 
P10 :  8/1-22/1 2.0 3.6 2.4 
P11 :  22/1-5/2 2.0 3.7 2.8 
P12 :  5/2-5/3 4.0 3.9 3.5 
P13 :  5/3-18/3 1.9 4.2 4.1 
P14 :  18/3-2/4 2.1 3.3 3.3 
P15 :  2/4-16-4 2.0 2.4 2.3 
P16 :  16-4-7/6 7.4 3.3 2.9 
P17 :  7/6-17/6 1.4 5.0 4.5 
P18 :  17/6-1/7 2.0 5.2 5.5 
P19 :  1/7-15/7 2.0 5.5 5.4 
P20 :  15/7-29/7 2.0 5.3 5.5 
 
 
 
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
5 8 11 13 14 17 19 21 23 25 27 31 33 35 37 44 46 48 50 52
Weeks
Mean number of eggs
I Group NI Group
 
FIG. 4. The evolution of egg production from 31 July 2002 to 29 July 2003 
 
211
 
 
FIG. 5. A hen with chicken pox lesions 
Feed consumption 
Feed was distributed to chicks at libitum . Adult chickens and cockerels/pullets in 
«intervention» flocks were given a feed supplement of 25 grams per bird/day which 
represents about 25% of the daily requireme nts of an adult bird (Anonymous, 1993). This 
feed supplementation was provi ded from September 2002 to Mars h 2003 and aimed to help 
filling the feed gap during this period (autumn and winter) of a low range feed availability in 
the study area.  
Feed consumption in «intervention» flocks is represented in Table XI. The total feed 
distributed to birds varied from 93.7 to 279.3 kg for a value of 243.6 to 725.4 MDH 
(Moroccan Dirham, the local currency), respectively. 
TABLE X. FEED CONSUMPTION IN «INTERVENTION» FLOCKS. 
Total feed consumed (kg) «intervention» 
group/flocks By chicks By adult chickens and 
cockerels/pullets 
total 
Value MDH) 
(2.6 DH/kg) 
I 66.2 213.1 279.3 725.4 
II 36.7 87.2 123.9 322.1 
III 64.5 117.6 182.1 473.5 
IV 28.4 65.4 93.7 243.6 
 1 MDH = 0.1 US$ 
Cost benefit analysis 
Parameters taken into account in the input  included the value of the flock at the 
beginning of the experiment and the cost of feed. The cost of brooders and housing was not 
counted in the analysis, considering it as a l ong term investment. Medication (anti-parasitic 
treatment) was not considered also in the analysis because of its very low cost and vaccination 
212
 
was applied to both study groups. Those paramete rs counted in the output included the flock 
value at the end of experiment plus the valu e of consumed and sold birds and eggs (Table 
XII). 
The value of profit in «intervention» flocks varied from 2470.00 to 6488.00 MDH 
with a mean value of 4710.00 MDH; whereas in «no intervention» flocks the profit did not 
exceed 1524.00 with a mean value of 1400.00 MDH. In order to make comparison between 
the 2 categories of flocks, the relative pr ofit was expressed as the output/input ratio. 
«intervention» flocks made significan t and better profit than «no intervention»  ones ; the 
mean relative profit in «intervention» flocks was 3.64 and only 2.55 in «no intervention»  
flocks.  
TABLE XI. INPUT, OUTPUT AND PROFIT IN TRIAL FLOCKS. 
INPUT OUPUT PROFIT Groups/ 
flocks Value of 
flock at 
beginning 
Value 
of feed 
S/total 
(MDH)
Value 
of 
flock 
at end
Value of 
sold and 
consumed 
birds 
Value of 
sold and 
consumed 
eggs 
S/total 
(MDH
) 
Output: 
input 
ratio 
Net 
profit 
(MDH)
I 2100.00 725.4 2825.40 1840 4720 2753 9313 3.30 6488 
II 980.00 322.1 1302.10 1870 1810 1445 5125 3.94 3823 
III 2220.00 473.5 2693.50 1580 5160 2014 8754 3.25 6061 
IV 560.00 243.6 803.60 1300 1120 854 3274 4.07 2470 
«    intervention» 
Mean 1465.00 441.15 1906.15 1647.5 3202.5 1766.5 6616.5 3.64 4710 
V 980.00 0.00 770.00 1140 200 950 2290 2.97 1520 
VI 980.00 0.00 980.00 720 910 874 2504 2.56 1524 
VII 1250.00 0.00 1250.00 690 1250 832 2772 2.22 1522 
VIII 740.00 0.00 740.00 580 830 574 1984 2.68 1244 
«no interven-
tion» Mean 987.50 0.00 987.50 782.5 797.5 807.5 2387.5 2.55 1400 
1 MDH = 0.1 US$ 
DISCUSSION 
The results indicate that the performed interventions had an overall beneficial effects 
on the parameters studied. Floc k size and structure and floc k production was significantly 
improved in «intervention» flocks compared to «no intervention»  ones. The observed 
mortality of young birds (Chicks and cockerels/pullets) in «intervention» flocks was 
significantly lower than in «no intervention»  flocks. This may be directly related to the 
implementation of brooders and feeding of the chicks. Under normal production conditions, 
where mortality was found very high in young birds, the farmers were not used to supplement 
the chicks nor to provide brooders (Kichou 
et al ., 2002b). It seems that this factors had 
tremendous positive effect on production since they had enormously contributed to the 
reduction of mortality and losses a nd consequently to the repopulation of flocks at a normal 
pace. 
Since birds from both categories of flocks were vaccinated against NCD and Gumboro 
disease, the 2 most prevalent in fectious disease in family poultry in Morocco (Bell, 1986, 
Mouloudi 1987, Kichou 
et al ., 2002a), The causes of high morality in «no intervention»  
flocks would be underfeeding, ot her infectious diseases (Kichou et al., 2002b). Losses from 
213
 
predators would be another contributing factor to losses of chicks because of lack of brooders 
in these flocks. 
During the whole study period the total eg g production was significantly higher in 
«intervention» flocks. Furthermore, the decrease  in egg production observed during the 
autumn and winter in both categor ies of flocks which is related to the short day light period, 
was significantly lesser in «intervention» flocks. This difference may be explained by the feed 
supplement we have assigned to birds fr om these flocks. Even the feed supplement 
represented only 25% of the daily requirements of  hens, it contributed to fulfil the energetic 
needs of birds during that period of  low range feed resources (Kichou et al., 2002b). It is not 
known how would be the egg production if a mor e important feed supplement have been 
provided taking into account that a such incr ease would raise the cost of production and 
consequently may lead to lower benefit margins.  
A drastic decrease in egg production has concerned all flocks because of a severe 
chicken pox outbreak during April 2003. Just af ter the outbreak production has progressively 
returned to normal levels. Ch icken pox outbreaks have been probably observed before in 
family poultry but this constitutes the first report of this disease in family chickens in 
Morocco. 
The cost-benefit analysis has shown that «intervention» flocks have made better profit 
than «no intervention» flocks. The mean relative profit in «intervention» flocks was 3.64 and 
only 2.55 in «no intervention» flocks. Farmers from «intervention» flocks could improve their 
production by the implementation of interventions we have assigned. This was achieved with 
little charges, which helped to get beneficial results. This show clearly that the 
implementation of such interventions, with reasonable costs, by the farmers themselves at a 
larger scale would have a positive effects on the farmers income in particular and on family 
poultry production sector in general.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work has been supported by IAEA research grant nº 10187 MOR. 
REFERENCES 
ANONYMOUS., Guide de l’Aviculture Tropicale. Sanofi Santé Nutrition Animale, France, 
(1993) pp 115. 
AIT BELARBI D., Essai de vaccination du poulet villageois contre la maladie de Newcastle. 
Thèse de Doctorat en Médecine Vétérinaire. Institut Agronomique et Vétérinaire 
Hassan II. Rabat, Maroc (1989). 
BELL J.G., Velogenic viscerotrocpic Newcastle disease virus strains in Morocco. Avian 
Diseases, (1986) 30(1): 231-233. 
BENABDELJALIL K., Broiler output stagnate s in Morocco, middlemen control the money 
while producers remain disorganized. Poultry International, (1997) 36(4): 38-43. 
KICHOU F, EL OMARI N. & JAOUZI T., Prevalence of Newcastle disease and infectious 
bursal disease in Moroccan village ch ickens. In: Livestock Community and 
Environment: The Proceedings of the 10
th International Conference of the Association 
for Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Copenhagen, (2002a) pp. 189-198. 
KICHOU F., EL OMARI N., TMIRI N. & JAOUZI. T., Health and management constraints 
to family poultry development in Morocco.  In: Characteristics and parameters of 
family poultry production in A frica. Results of a FAO/IAEA Coordinated Research 
214
 
Programme on Assessment of the Effectiveness of Vaccination Strategies Against 
Newcastle Disease and Gumboro Disease Using Immunoassay-based Technologies for 
Increasing Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa, IAEA, Vienna, (2002b) pp. 73-85. 
MOULOUDI S., Incidence de la maladie de Ne wcastle chez le poulet "Beldi" au Maroc. 
Thèse de Doctorat en Médecine Vétérinaire. Institut Agronomique et Vétérinaire 
Hassan II. Rabat, Maroc, (1987). 
215
 
IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH AND MANAGEMENT OF VILLAGE 
POULTRY IN MOZAMBIQUE 
Q.J.P. LOBO1, R.G. ALDERS2, A. DA SILVA1, M. HARUN2  
1National Veterinary Research Institute, Maputo, Mozambique; 
2Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project, Maputo, Mozambique. 
Abstract 
Characteristics of the village poultry production are discussed, including constraints such as 
inadequate health care associated with Newcastle disease (ND) outbreaks as well as low productivity 
and inadequate housing. Once ND has been controlled, it will be essential to improve housing, 
nutrition and general management. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mozambique is located in South East Africa and covers an area of 802,000 km 2. In 
1999, the population was estimated to be 16 m illion (52% female and 48% male) with 71% 
living in rural areas [1]. Two thirds of Mozambicans live in absolute poverty, surviving on 
less than a quarter of US dollar per day. It is  estimated that 72% of the general population is 
illiterate. Illiteracy is higher among women (85%) [2]. Mozambican economic development is 
based on agriculture with livestock and crop pr oduction considered to be the cornerstone of 
poverty alleviation. Recognisin g the potential value of livestock, including rural poultry 
production, to household food security, income  generation and poverty alleviation, the 
improvement of smallholder pou ltry production has became a pr iority within the National 
Agriculture Development Programme.  
The control of Newcastle disease in village chickens in Mozambique has been 
intensively studied since the mid-1990`s by the National Veterinary Research Institute 
(INIVE) [3]. The studies involved three types of ND vaccine: ITA-NEW, NDV4-HR and I-2 
[3]. INIVE continues to produce the I-2 ND vaccine for use in rural areas. 
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF VILLAGE POULTRY PRODUCTION  
Village poultry production in Mozambique is based on scavenging indigenous 
domestic fowl. Small-scale farmers own over 90% of the national flock, which is estimated to 
be approximately 25 million birds. The “local” chicken raised by village farmers is 
characterized by a great variety of types and colours and low production, but it is well adapted 
to the environment and resistant to many common diseases.  
Production ang reproduction 
The average weight at slaughter (at 5–6 mont hs) is 1.3 kg. Hens lay from 40 to 50 
eggs per year in 3 to 4 clutches, with almost a ll eggs being destined for incubation. The flock 
size per household is about 7 to 15 birds. The first incubation is observed at 9-12 months of 
age, with 10-12 eggs per clutch; 8-9 chicks are hatched (78% hatching rate) and survival rate 
is low ranging from 6–7 live chicks (66–69%) [4, 5]. From July to December hatching is 
reduced and chick mortality is higher. Lower ch ick mortality occurs when maize plants are 
high and birds can hide from predators (Febru ary-June). Low hatching rates in the summer 
seasons are mainly due to poor nest types and external parasites [4]. 
216
 
Housing  
Around 47% of households do not provide a house or shelter for their birds usually the 
birds perch in trees or stay on roof of ow ners house [4, 5]. Approximately 5% of the 
households keep birds inside the main house and 48% of households provide a chicken house 
for the birds. 
The most common chicken house is usually ma de from locally available materials 
such as wood, bamboo and mud bricks. In areas where poor housing is common, losses due to 
predation are high. Some farmers are afraid to build a chicken house because they believe that 
it will be easier for the thieves to steal the birds.  
Nutrition 
Generally, village poultry farmers are poor and cannot afford to purchase commercial 
feeds for their birds. Thus, almost all of the feed for the birds comes from the local 
environment. The feed supply is relatively st able when the environment can provide an 
abundance of food and water during the rainy seas on. However, this situation deteriorates 
with the advent of the dry season. Often by th e end of the dry period, neither scavenged food 
nor household refuse and crop by-products are su fficient to maintain a satisfactory level of 
production [4, 5]. 
Predation 
Besides the loss of birds due to disease the major source of loss of live birds are the 
activities of thieves and predators [5]. Predators can be classified into two groups: one 
consists of birds of prey, which tend to take young chickens; and the other group are 
mammals such as cats, dogs and wild animals that attack both adults and young birds. 
DISEASES OF VILLAGE POULTRY 
The main problem in village chicken production is Newcastle disease (ND) with 
farmers complaining annually of high mortality in their chickens. ND has been described by 
several authors as a major constraint to development of poultry production in rural areas [6, 7, 
8].  
Newcastle disease 
ND is endemic in the country, occurring every year mainly in village poultry. 
Although few surveys of prevalence of ND in Mozambique have been undertaken, available 
information indicates that this disease is the most important cons traint to the rearing of rural 
chicken [6, 7, 9]. In 1955 INIVE commenced production of attenuated, live ND vaccines and 
produced vaccines based on strains F, B1, La Sota and Komarov [10]. In 1996, the Australian 
Centre for International Agricultural Research Project assisted with the introduction of I-2 ND 
vaccine. This thermotolerant ND vaccine was successfully tested and a comprehensive ND 
control package based on this vaccine developed for use in rural areas. The I-2 ND vaccine is 
now in use in five provinces with vaccination being performed by community vaccinators on 
a cost-recovery basis. 
In 2000, World Vision Mozambique with f unding from the Australian Agency for 
International Development, in itiated a food security projec t in Manjacaze district, Gaza 
province, with a ND control component using I-2 ND vaccine. Around 25,400 chickens were 
217
 
vaccinated in this period representing 87% of participating poultry farmers [11]. Sera from 
both vaccinated and unvaccinated chicken were collected and tested using the HI test. Results 
showed that 90.5% of vaccinated chicken had an average geometric mean titre (GMT) of log
2 
6 and 36.8% of unvaccinated chickens had a GMT of log2 3.5. 
Other diseases in rural poultry  
Survey data on other diseases affecting village poultry production are scarce. The 
information collected at farm level by surveys showed that after controlling ND, other 
diseases such as fowl pox, a nd endo- and ecto-parasites may pl ay a role in chicken mortality 
[9].  
CONCLUSION 
To improve the village chicken production in Mozambique, strategies include 
reduction of the losses caused by ND through va ccination of village chickens and improving 
their productivity through better nutrition, housing and general management. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vi enna, Austria for providing financial for 
the principal author to attend this research coordination meeting. We are grateful to 
Mozambican farmers for their willingness to share their knowledge of village poultry 
production. Thanks go to the Mozambican Mini stry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 
the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research, the Australian Agency for 
International Development and the International Fund for Agri cultural Development for the 
support of research on village chicken production in Mozambique. 
REFERENCES 
[1] INE Recenseamento geral da população e habitação, 1997. Instituto Nacional de 
Estatística, Maputo (1999). 
[2] MAP, MPF, MISAU, DPCCN, FEWS, PMA, FAO, MSF/CIS Vulnerability assessment 
for Mozambique. Maputo (1999). 
[3] ALDERS, R.G., FRINGE, R., MATA, B.V. Experiences in the control of Newcastle 
disease in Mozambique. Characteristics and Parameters of Family Poultry Production 
in Africa. IAEA, Vienna (2002) 159-166. 
[4] HARUN, M, MASSANGO, F.A. Village Po ultry Production in Mozambique: Farming 
Systems and Ethnoveterinary Knowledge in Angonia and Tsangano Districts, Tete 
Province. In: Alders, R.G. and Spradbr ow, P.B. SADC Planning Workshop on 
Newcastle Disease Control in Village Chic kens. Proceedings of an International 
Workshop, Maputo, Mozambique, 6-9 March, 2000. ACIAR Proceedings No. 103. 
(2001) 76-79. 
[5] MATA, B., BAGNOL, B., ANJOS, F., DIAS, L., DIAS, P.T., ALDERS, R. . Estudo para 
o controle da doença de Newcastle com aplicação da vacina I-2: Criação de galinhas e 
a doença de Newcastle no sector familiar em Angoche e Manjacaze e análise 
custo/benefício na produção, distribuição e utilização da va cina I-2. Agricultural and 
Rural Development Ministry. IFAD Project/Credit No. 432-MZ (2000).  
[6] ALDERS, R.G. (2000) Participatory methodologies and village poultry production. 
Proceedings of the workshop on possibilitie s for small holder poultry projects in 
eastern and southern Africa, Morogoro, Tanzania, May 22-25, 2000, pp 103-109. 
218
 
[7] HARUN, M., MASSANGO, F.A. (1996) Estudo sobre sistemas de produção de pequenas 
espécies nos distritos de Angónia e Tsangano na província de Tete. Maputo, DANIDA. 
[8] WETHLI,E. Final report on the Poultry De velopment Study for the Family Farming 
Livestock Rehabilitation Programme, Austral Consultoria e Projectos, February (1995). 
[9] MAVALE, A.P. (1995) Epidemiology and control of Newcastle disease in rural poultry in 
Mozambique. Master Degree Thesis, Ve terinary Epidemiology and Economics 
Research Unit, Department of Agriculture, University of Reading. 
[10] FRINGE, R., DIAS, P.T. 1999. Newcastle  disease in Mozambique. In: Rweyemamu, 
M.M., Palaya, V.,Win, T. and Sylla, D. ed. Newcastle vaccine for rural Africa. 
Proceedings of workshop held at Pan African Veterinary Vaccine Centre (PANVAC), 
Debre Zeit, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 22-26 April 1991, 73-74. 
[11] LOBO, Q., ALDERS, R. Relatório de avaliação das actividades ligadas ao controle da 
doença de Newcastle realizadas pelo pr ojecto da Visão Mundi al em Manjacaze, 
Provínvia de Gaza Abril de 2001. National Veterinary Research Institute, Maputo, 
Moçambique(2001). 
219
 
INCREASING FAMILY POULTRY PRODUCTION IN THE SUDAN 
THROUGH NEWCASTLE DISEASE CONTROL AND IMPROVING 
HOUSING  
A.I. KHALAFALL,.S.A. ABDEL AZIZ, S.M. ELHASSAN 
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Khartoum, Shambat, Sudan 
Abstract 
This report describes field experiences in the improving family poultry production in the 
Sudan. Activities associated with investigation of features of production and constraints to this sector 
are reviewed. Constraints include inadequate health care associated with attacks of ND as well as 
external and internal parasites, poor productivity and inadequate housing. Interventions implemented 
included control of Newcastle disease by a wet thermo stable vaccine produced locally and improving 
housing by the supply of chicken cages. The interventions resulted in a substantial increase in egg and 
meat production that contributed positively to increasing household food security and the generation 
of supplementary cash income. Future implementation of the findings of this research project 
necessitates considerable community and governmental participation. 
INTRODUCTION 
Throughout Africa, village chickens are the chief source of animal protein in rural 
areas [1, 7]. In addition, they were reported to  have a great social importance [5]. Among a 
population of 45.3 millions of chicken in Suda n, the conventional sector contains around 30 
millions (66.2%) from which the annual meat and egg production is about 20.1 million birds 
and 900 million eggs respectively [6]. 
In 1999 the Animal Production and Health Se ction of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
embarked on a programme to promote farmyard poultry production in Africa by developing 
practical vaccination strategies against ND and Gumboro disease in some African countries 
and monitoring immunity using ELISA technique. The present communication is an overview 
of activities of the project in the Sudan.  
MAIN FEATURES OF VILLAGE POULTRY PRODUCTION  
The production system in rural areas of th e Sudan is based on scavenging indigenous 
domestic fowl. Flock size in this system averages 18.3 birds per household and varied 
between 6 and 63 birds. The average clutches re corded per hen per year were 3.1 and ranged 
from 1 to 6. Average eggs per clutch were 12 and varied between 2 and 20. Chick mortality 
(chicks died / chicks hatched) was 22.4%. 
Housing status in villages 
In response to question on where chickens roost, round half (48.7%) of households 
stated that they provide chicken house for th eir birds to stay overnight. For 20.6% of 
households no house or shelter was provided and chickens roost overnight in the main house 
while some birds (12.8%) perched in trees or stayed overnight on a roof. The most common 
types of housing observed in the study area were  made from locally available materials such 
as mud, wood, bricks and sometimes scrap metals. Poor housing facilities observed in the 
220
 
study area highlighted the need for a better housing as a strategy to reduce losses, particularly 
from predators. Although there were some type s of housing, this was generally inadequate 
and farmers themselves requested an effective and affordable housing design. 
Animal health status 
We recorded that about 77% of surveyed  households experien ced disease problem 
during the year that precede commencement of th e project [4]. External parasites (ticks and 
mites) and Newcastle disease are the most important and prevailing diseases in the study areas 
with 50% and 30% incidence rate respectively.  Other minor ailments include diarrhoea, 
swollen joints and jaundice.  
CONSTRAINTS TO POULTRY PRODUCTION  
The major constraints encountered during the surveys of village poultry production in 
the Sudan were identified by our team as inadequate health care associated with attacks of ND 
as well as external and internal parasites, poor productivity and inadequate housing.  
Diseases of village poultry 
Newcastle disease 
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) was first isolated and identified in the Sudan in 1962 
in a natural outbreak of the disease [2] and the most prevalent strains of the virus identified 
were reported to belong to the viscerotropic velogenic pathotype [3]. During the first year of 
this project and before implementation of inte rventions, two out of 20 households (10%) in 
zone 1 reported occurrence of ND during the study year compared to nine out of 12 
households (75%) in zone 2. The disease caused an overall mortality rate of 76% with a mean 
mortality rate of 66% and 69% in zone 1 and 2,  respectively (Table I). All age groups were 
found affected and the mortality rate was 70% in  chicks, 98% in growers and 62% in adults 
(data not shown).  
Two isolates of NDV were obtained in embryonated eggs following their confirmation 
by HA and HI using a reference NDV serum. Th e isolates were designated as GD.S.1 and 
GD. Gh.1. The isolates showed similarity in that they kill embryos rapidly in mean death time 
test, produced visceral lesions in 8-week-old chicks and had a high intracerebral pathogenicity 
index (ICPI). Accordingly, the isolated viruses were grouped as velogenic viscerotropic NDV 
(VVNDV) pathotype. 
Early in this project a serological survey  was conducted for antibodies against ND in 
village chickens measured by ELISA. The sero- conversion and presence of antibody against 
ND, indicate previous exposure to the virus. It was noted that the antibody prevalence in 
village chickens in zone 2 (Gadarif area) was higher compared to zone 1 ( Khartoum area). 
External parasites 
External parasites (ticks, mites and lice) are considered the most prevailing diseases in 
the study area with 50% incidence rate. Ticks (Argus persicus) in severe infestations can lead 
to paralysis and death. External parasites are a major problem which can proliferate under the 
current poor housing conditions observed in the study area. Materials commonly used to build 
poultry houses in the study area trigger external parasites and prevent their control. During the 
221
 
first two years of this study we detected tick in festation in 7 out of 22 households in zone 1 
(32%) and 10 out of 12 households (83%) in z one 2. Red lice were detected only in 5 
households in zone 2.  
Internal parasites 
Cestodes and trematodes are common in village chickens because the husbandry 
practices favour the intermediate hosts (ants, beetles, earth worms, etc.). Table III lists 
helminth parasites de tected as oosysts in fecal samples collected during 2001-2003 in the 
study area with their prevalence rate. The incidence of tape worms was higher in Zone 2 
compared to Zone 1 probably due to climatic co nditions of heavy rains that facilitate growth 
of the vectors. 
TABLE I. DETAILS OF NEWCASTLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS DURING JULY-AUGUST 1999. 
ZONE 
 NO. 
VILLAGE NO. HOUSEHOLD NO. NO. DEAD/TOTAL NO. OF 
AFFECTED CHICKENS (%) 
1 5 2 10/18 (56) 
1 5 4 4/10 (40) 
2 1 1 25/26 (96) 
2 1 2 45/54 (85) 
2 1 3 18/23 (78) 
2 1 4 20/23 (91) 
2 2 2 11/12 (92) 
2 2 3 41/50 (82) 
2 3 1 21/34 (62) 
2 3 2 14/23 (61) 
2 3 4 12/21 (57) 
TOTAL 11  222/294 (76) 
TABLE II. ANTIBODY AGAINST NDV AS DETECTED BY ELISA IN VILLAGE CHICKENS 
IN THE SUDAN IN 2000. 
ZONE NO. VILLAGE NO. NO. POSITIVE/ TOTAL NO. TESTED (%) 
1 1 2/35 (5.7) 
1 2 3/39 (10.2) 
1 3 5/43 (2.3) 
1 4 0/33 (0) 
1 5 9/54 (17) 
2 1 9/28 (32.1) 
2 2 14/24 (58) 
2 3 12/29 (41) 
TOTAL  55/310 (18) 
 
 
 
222
 
TABLE III. INFESTATION OF INTERNAL PARASITES IN VILLAGE CHICKENS IN THE 
SUDAN. 
PARASITE FECAL INFESTATION RATE 
ZONE1   ZONE 2 
Raillietina spp. 20 % 41% 
Choanotaenia  2.9 % 12% 
Subulura spp. 5.7 % 30% 
Cotugenia spp. - 4% 
Ascaridia spp. 2.9 % 55% 
Gongylonema spp. - 4% 
Acuaria spp - 2% 
Coccidia spp. 10 % 33% 
Bacterial infections 
During the course of this project E.Coli and Salmonella spp were isolated from several 
village birds brought to the laboratory. In one occasion a mortality of 20% due to septicaemia 
caused by Salmonella was reported. 
Gumboro disease 
To date no diagnosis of IBD in village poultry of the study area has been made. A 
serological survey using agar gel diffusion test (AGDT) for antibodies to IBD revealed a 
prevalence of 5% and 28% for zone 1 and 2, respectively (Table IV). 
TABLE IV. PREVALENCE OF ANTIBODIES AGAINST INFECTIOUS BURSAL DISEASE IN 
VILLAGE CHICKENS IN THE SUDAN. 
ZONE VILLAGE NO. OF POSITIVE 
SERA/ NO.TESTED 
SERA (%) 
TOTAL ZONE 
PERCENT 
POSITIVITY 
1 EL Daba 1/25 (4%)  
1 Ezergab 1/18 (5.6%)  
1 El Gaili 2/36 (5.6) 5% 
1 Hassana 1/17(5.9%)  
1 Abohalima 1/24 (4%)  
2 Abbayo 5/22(22.7%)  
2 Elsofi 7/28(25%) 28% 
2 Ghibaisha 10/27 (37%)  
 
INTERVENTIONS 
Vaccinating against ND 
During the period 1999-2003 more than 6000 doses of ND I 2 vaccine were distributed 
to households in both zones. The vaccine was di vided into aliquots of 0.5 ml each and kept 
at–20 0C in two main distribution points each for one zone. The method used to administer the 
vaccine was intraocular route with a dose of 2X 10 6 EID 50%. Initially vaccination was 
223
 
performed by veterinary assistants and subsequently by the farmers themselves after adequate 
training.  
Control of other diseases 
In the earliest field visits chickens infested with ticks or lice were dipped in an 
insecticide solution and the farmers were trained how to properly dilute the insecticide and 
use it safely. In some instances antibiotic pow ders were distributed in case of complaints 
attributed to bacterial infections and also de-wormers. 
Improvement of housing 
Chicken cages in a rectangular shape and of dimension 2X1X1 meter were 
constructed. The cages were made of metal bars and were fitted with wire net on all sides and 
over the top. The cages are light in weight and movable. A metal door was built on the small 
side of the cage to enable entry and release of chickens. The average cost of a cage was 
estimated at 29 USD. Twenty chicken cages were locally manufactured and distributed to 12 
households in zone 1 and 8 households in zone  1. The remaining households of the project 
were left as control.  
OUTCOMES OF INTERVENTIONS 
To assess the impact of the interventions introduced (control of ND and supply of 
chicken cages) we propose to use a combinati on of two approaches: epidemiological and 
economic. 
Control of Newcastle disease and other diseases 
Epidemiology 
If we look at the inciden ce of ND outbreaks recorded in the year 1998/1999 before 
commencement of vaccination and during 3 years after vaccination (Table V) a clear pattern 
of decline in the incidence is obvious. Two outbreaks were recorded in region 3 of zone 1 due 
to cessation of vaccination durin g the rainy season caused by the absence of the assigned 
veterinary assistant. 
TABLE V. NUMBERS OF NEWCASTLE DISEASE OUTBREAKS PRE- AND POST-
VACCINATION. 
 NO. OF OUTBREAKS 
PRE-VACCINATION       POST-VACCINATION 
 ZONE 1 2 0 
ZONE 2 9 2 
 
With regard to external and internal pa rasites and bacterial infections, though no 
accurate measurements on their effect were made, there is a marked improvement in the 
health of chickens in the study area and the complaints from such ailments declined 
substantially. 
 
224
 
Economy 
As a result of ND vaccination, the increase in  total number of chickens is translated 
into an increase in their sale and consumption. Since improving housing also contribute to the 
economic analysis of costs and benefits the whole calculation will be described later. 
Usefulness of chicken houses 
Farmers who received chicken cages were vi sited frequently to assess the use of the 
cages. All households except 2, all from zone 1, utilized the cages but with different usages 
(Table VI). Those farmers who prefer to use the cages for rearing newly hatched chicks 
separately explained that by this way they reduce chick losses and eventually increase the 
output of eggs and meat. It is known that lack of proper shelte r for chicks immediately after 
hatching results in high mortality. Further more this practice according to the farmers 
increased their profit and subsequently encouraged them to buy additional chicks and rear 
them together with their own. We noted that two of these farmers succeeded in building new 
cages using the same specifications. 
Those who prefer using the cage for brooding  argue that brooding chickens and their 
newly hatched chicks become secure from predators while been kept in the cage.  
It is noteworthy to mention that 8 out 18 house holds recorded that they started given feed 
supplements to their chickens after the use of the cages. 
Criticism to the use of chicken cages include the small size of cages and possible 
generation of heat during summer times. In one occasion the farmer who received the cage 
claimed that it is useless and she is no longer use it. 
TABLE VI. USAGE OF CHICKEN CAGES IN VILLAGE IN THE SUDAN. 
NO USE FOR 
ADULTS 
FOR 
BROODING 
FOR CHICK 
REARING 
MIXED USE 
2 7 3 5 3 
ECONOMIC ANALYSES 
Accounting for inputs 
Newcastle disease vaccine production costs 
• Production of 8000 doses of I-2 vaccine  costs 800 Sudanese Dinnars (1 
USD=260 Dinnars); so one dose costs 0.0004 USD. However for the sake of 
sustainability we calculated the cost acco rding to the cost of a commercially 
available vaccine (Komarov strain locally  produced in the Central Veterinary 
laboratory). This vaccine costs 0.023 USD per dose. The cost of vaccinating 1000 
chickens per year would equal to 23 USD. 
• A number of 20 chicken cages of dimension 2x1x1 meter were constructed. The 
cost of materials and labor to make one cage is 29 USD which is equal to the value 
of 19 adult village chickens. 
• Selling price of adults:1.8 USD; lowered in the 2nd year to 1.7 
• Selling price of growers:0.8 USD lowered in the 2nd year to 0.7 
• Selling price for eggs:0.112 USD per an egg ; increased to 0.123 in the 3rd year. 
225
 
Budgeting 
Income calculations and determination of profit and return for years 1, 2 and 3 of the 
project are presented in Table VII.  
TABLE VII. SUDAN PARTIAL BUDGET. 
US Dollars Year 1: 
Vaccination + 
antibiotics and 
insecticides 
Year 2: 
Vaccination + 
antibiotics, 
insecticides and 
cages 
Year 3: 
Vaccination + 
antibiotics, 
insecticides and 
cages 
INCREASE IN 
INCOME 
763.00 2,315.00 2,315.00 
Increased cost 121.00 705.00 125.00 
Vaccination cost 23.00 30.00 30.00 
Housing cost 0.00 580.00 0.00 
Labor cost 38.00 45.00 45.00 
Antibiotics and 
insecticides cost 
60.00 50.00 50.00 
Profit 642.00 1,610 2,190 
Return 6.3 3.3 18.5 
 
It can be seen that the gross profit margin of poultry production in the participating 
households have increased remarkably and th e interventions we introduced are feasible. 
However, we believe that the mos t useful indicator to draw farm er's attention is what they 
actually gained. The answer we received from the farmer, who do not care of costs and 
benefits calculation, in most cases, was that we are now living better than before. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In the present report we described the feature of village poultry production in the 
Sudan and how we tried to impr ove it through interventions cons isted of disease control and 
improve housing. The interventions resulted in  a substantial increase in egg and meat 
production that contributed positively to increasing household food security and the 
generation of supplementary cash income. For sustainability and implementation of results of 
this project considerable community and govern mental participation is  needed. The results 
would form a basis for designing a package of disease control and improving housing and sets 
guidelines for increasing family poultry production. The funds transferred through the project 
were invaluable and allowed us to improve our research capacity and initiate applied research 
for the benefit of our community.  
226
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank the Joint FAO/IAEA  Division, Vienna, Austria for providing 
financial support, ELISA kits, c onsumable and equipment to carry  out this study. Our deep 
appreciation goes to the rural farmers for their cooperation and interest. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] ALEMU,Y., Poultry production in Ethi opia. World poultry Science Journal 51,197-
201(1995). 
[2] KARRAR, G., MUSTAFA, E., Newcastle disease in the Sudan. Bulletin. Int. Epiz. 
62,890-896 (1964). 
[3] KHALAFALLA, A.I., FADOL, M. A., HAMIED, O.A., HUSSEIN, Y.A., MAHASIN E., 
Pathogenic properties of Newcastle diseas e virus isolates in the Sudan. Acta 
Veterinaria Hungarica 40(4):329-333 (1992). 
[4] KHALAFALLA, A.I., S. AWAD., W. HASSAN., In Proceeding of the 2nd Research 
Coordination meeting of th e coordinated Research pr ogramme on improvement of 
health and Management of Family Poultry Production in Africa. 4-8 September,2000, 
Morogoro, Tanzania (2002), pp.87-93. 
[5] MUKIIBI, G., Epidemiology of Newcastle disease and the need to vaccinate local chicken 
in Uganda. In: Newcastle Disease in village chickens. Control with Thermostable oral 
vaccines, Proceeding No. 39, Australian Centre for International Agricultural research, 
Canberra, P.155 (1992). 
[6] SULIEMAN, M.F., Egg characteristics, ge netic and phenotypic relationship of body 
weight at various ages in  indigenous chickens. MSc. Thesis, Faculty of Animal 
Production, University of Khartoum (1996). 
227
 
OBSERVATIONS ON PRODUCTION, LABORATORY TESTING AND 
FIELD APPLICATION OF I-2 THERMO STABLE NEWCASTLE DISEASE 
VACCINE IN THE SUDAN 
A.I. KHALAFALL
1, W. HASSAN3, M. ELNUR3, A.S. ALI2 
1 Department of Microbiology and Department of Preventive Medicine2, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Khartoum, Shambat, Sudan 
3Central Veterinary Research Laboratories, Soba, Khartoum, Sudan 
Abstract 
In the present study, a working seed of the Newcastle disease (ND) thermostable vaccine (I-2) 
vaccine (supplied by ACIAR, Australia) was prepared in Sudan (CVRL, Khartoum). Experimental 
trials were conducted to determine safety, potency and the effect of age of chickens, route of 
administration and dose on the immunogenicity of the vaccine. Vaccination of chicks at 2 and 3 weeks 
old yielded better immune response and higher protection rates as compared to 1 day and 1 week. 
Boostering of chicks resulted in a relatively better (p < 0.05) immune response in all age groups as 
compared to those vaccinated once. With regard to  dose, total protection against challenge infection 
was attained when chicks were vaccinated with double the recommended dose of the vaccine via the 
intraocular route (I/O). The I/O route was found to be superior to the intranasal (I/N) which was 
confirmed to be better than the drinking water (D/W) route as observed from antibody titers and 
percent protection after challenge. Comparison of the doses involved using half, recommended, double 
and four times the dose of the I-2 vaccine, proved that even half the dose resulted in a reasonable 
immune response and protection. Moreover, usin g double or even four times the dose gave 100% 
protection without resulting in any adverse post vaccinal reactions. Field vaccination trials of village 
chickens (Baladi) by the D/W, I/O and I/N routes using I-2 vaccine showed better immune response 
for I/O route as compared to other routes. The immune response was superior when the I-2 vaccine 
was used as compared to Komarov vaccine. Use of the thermostable vaccine of ND (I-2) was proved- 
from results of this work- very reliable, as it was safe, highly immunogenic and protective. 
Experiences in distribution of the vaccine and vaccination of village chickens are discussed. 
INTRODUCTION 
Newcastle disease (ND) is a contagious and fatal viral disease affecting all species of 
domestic and wild birds. It was also defined as one of the mos t important diseases of poultry 
worldwide [17]. The disease is caused by a virus belonging to the genus Rubulavirus of the 
subfamily Paramyxovirinae of the family Paramyxoviridae [17].  
Newcastle disease is a major health probl em in poultry industry with a worldwide 
distribution. The modes of the disease transmission are correlated with the routes of the 
vaccine application. Transmission of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) between birds is by 
either inhalation or ingestion. It is clear that  infective virus may be present in aerosols and 
that birds placed in an atmosphere containing such aerosols become infected [2]. This is the 
basis for application of live vaccines by spra y and aerosol generators [16]. Ingestion of 
contaminated faeces is also proved as the main  method for bird to bird spread of virulent 
enteric (NDV). Similarly, this assumed the application of the vaccines via the drinking water 
and food [3]. 
The most common routes of ND live lentogenic vaccines application, used worldwide, 
are via the drinking water (D/W), intranasal (I/N), eye dropping (I/O) and beak dipping (B/D) 
[2]. Application of live vaccines by sprays and aerosols is popular due to the ease with which 
large numbers of birds can be vaccinated in a short time [2]. 
228
 
Other routes of vaccine application such as wing-web (W/W) and intramuscular (I/M) 
injection are exclusivel y adopted for the mesogenic strain vaccines as they tend to display 
greater virulence for birds. Examples of these are Mukteswar, K and Roakin. mesogenic 
vaccines [2]. 
The thermostable vaccines of ND I-2 and V4 (A ustralian strains) are used to control 
ND in village flocks in Africa and Asia. According to Spradbrow [19], the best way of 
controlling ND in small family flocks in Asian countries was to administer the thermostable 
live vaccine strains orally. However, in some A frican countries these strains offered the best 
and most reliable protection at population level by eye drop method [1, 8].  
As the live viral vaccines requires a cold chain during transport, thermostable vaccines, which 
tolerate high temperatures for longer than conventional vaccines, offered an opportunity to 
improve ND vaccination strategies for village poultry in Asia and Africa [13, 15]. 
In this study the effects of age, route of application and dose of ND thermostable 
vaccine (I-2) are determined experimentally and under Sudan field conditions. Information on 
efficacy outlined in the present work are needed prior to approval of this strain as a routine 
vaccine for village chickens.  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Viruses 
The viruses used in the study were as follows: Freeze-dried I-2 seed vaccine of NDV, 
kindly supplied by Prof. P.B. Spradbrow from Un iversity of Queensland in Australia. The 
virus was originally isolated in Australia  with funding from the Australian Centre for 
International Agricultural Research (ACIAR).  A virulent velogenic viscerotropic NDV 
isolated from an outbreak of ND in El-Obeid (Sudan) was used in this study as a challenge 
virus. LaSota strain was used for preparation of the antigen used in HA and HI tests. 
Chicken embryonated eggs 
Embryonated eggs and one-day-old chicks were obtained from the poultry farm of 
Coral Poultry Company in Khartoum. Chicks were vaccinated against infectious bursal 
disease (IBD) at two-weeks of age. 
Blood sampling 
Chicks used in vaccination trials were sampled for blood by heart puncture using 
disposable syringes and then the sera separated.  
Haemagglutination (HA) and haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test  
These were done as described by Allan et al [7]. 
Preparation of I-2 wet vaccine  
One ampoule of freeze-dried I-2 seed strain of NDV was diluted with 20mL sterile 
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and divided into ten vials, each of which contained two mL 
and stored as master seed at –20
°C. 
229
 
Two vials of the master seed were thor oughly mixed and used to inoculate 40 
embryonated eggs by the allantoi c route with a dose of 0.1mL/ egg. Each egg was harvested 
separately and the allantoic fluids (AFs) were  tested by the HA and HI tests for the virus 
identification. Positive AFs were then pooled and centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 30 minutes and 
dispensed in 2mL cryogenic vials and stored at –20°C prior to use as a working seed. Vaccine 
batches were prepared from the working seed in embryonated eggs. 
Titration of the vaccine virus 
Titration of virus infectivity was done following standard techniques [21]. 
Sterility test of the vaccine 
Samples were taken with a Pasteur pipette from a recons tituted vial of vaccine and 
cultured on thioglycolate media, mycoplasma broth and sabouraud broth. 
Challenge infection 
Vaccinated and control chicks that were used in laboratory vaccination trials were 
challenged with the virulent Sudanese isolate of NDV El Obeid strain). All chickens were 
challenged with 0.2 mL of the virus containing 2x 10 8.2/0.1mL EID50 using intramuscular 
(I/M) route. Challenged chickens were obser ved daily for a period of 14 days after the 
challenge the mortalities were recorded.  
Experimental design 
One hundred, one-day old chicks were divided into five groups of 20 birds each and 
vaccinated at one day-old, 1,2 and 3 weeks of age with 0.1 mL of I-2 vaccine containing 106.13 
EID50 intranasally. Vaccinated chicks were furthe r divided into two subgroups of 10 chicks 
each (a & b). Chicks in the subgroup (a) were not boostered while chicks in the subgroup (b) 
received a booster dose of the same vaccine 2 weeks post first vaccination. All five groups 
including the control were challenged four weeks (booster dosed group) and six weeks (single 
dosed group) post last vaccination. The antibody response to the vaccine was assessed by the 
HI four and six weeks after the first and second vaccination and after challenge. 
To determine the effect of route of administration on the immunity to the vaccine, 
forty chicks were divided into groups) of ten chicks each and were vaccinated at two weeks 
by I/N, I/O and DW routes. Two weeks later, vaccinated chicks boostered via the same routes 
of first vaccination. Four weeks later, all chicks including those in the control group were 
challenged with the virulent NDV. 
To determine the effect of the vaccine dose on immunity, fifty chicks were divided 
into five groups) of ten chicks each and vaccinated via the I/N route with recommended dose, 
half dose, two times and four times recommended dose of the vaccine. Humoral immune 
response was measured by HI and protection by  challenge experiments with the virulent 
NDV. 
Field vaccination trial 
This experiment was conducted to determine the immunogenicity of the thermo stable 
I-2 vaccine of NDV under Sudan field conditi ons and consisted of two field trials: (
i) Three 
flocks of commercial layers were vaccinated at three-week-old with I-2 vaccine using the I/O 
230
 
route. Another three flocks we re vaccinated with K-strain at the same age with the 
recommended dose using I/N route. (ii) Five flocks of adult indigenous village chickens were 
vaccinated by I-2 and K-strain as for the commercial layer flocks. 
Field application of I-2 vaccine 
Based on the results of previous experiments we started to vaccinate village chickens 
in both zones using the I/O route of admi nistration and double reco mmended dose of the 
vaccine (106 EID50 / dose). Two distribution points (Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shambat 
for zone 1 and The Regional Veterinary Laborato ry, Gedarif for zone 2) were supplied with 
aliquots of the vaccine (0.5 mL vials) which were kept at –20 °C. Only healthy chickens were 
vaccinated and farmers were informed of the need to revaccinate their chicks. Veterinary 
assistants representing each participating village were trained how to keep the vaccine in good 
condition and how to dilu te and administer it properly. Each assistant was instructed to 
perform vaccination or supervise vaccination by villagers in his village at intervals of 3-4 
months. Eye droppers were distribut ed by our team after calibration according to the size of 
the drop that forms. 
Statistical analysis 
The statistical significance of differences between groups of data was determined 
using the two-tailed Student’s unpaired t-test. 
RESULTS 
The master and working seeds of the I-2
 vaccine and a batch of the vaccine were 
prepared. The 50% infectivity in embryonated eggs (EID50) of the vaccine was estimated and 
found to be 10 9.13/ mL the same as indicated in the manufacturer guideline for the vaccine 
production. The prepared vaccine was confirmed to be free from bacterial, mycoplasmal or 
fungal contamination. 
The mean HI titres (log 2) and percent protection among the four age groups, before 
vaccination and six weeks after it and % protection two weeks post challenge when one dose 
of the I-2 vaccine was given are shown in Table I. 
The mean HI antibody titers and percent protection produced by vaccination of two 
week-old chicks with ND-I-2 vaccine through I/O, I/N and D/W using half, recommended, 
double and four times the vaccine dose were demonstrated in Table II. 
Intraocular route gave significantly (p 
<0.01) higher antibody responses as compared 
to DW and slightly better than I/N route. Th e mean HI titers and percent protection produced 
were 5 log2, 100% (I/O); 4.7 log 2, 90% (I/N) and 3.8 log 2, 45.5% (D/W). The immunity and 
protection obtained from the field trials were demonstrated in Table III.  
 
 
 
231
 
TABLE I.  THE IMMUNE RESPONSE (HI ANTIBODY) AND PERCENT PROTECTION OF 
CHICKENS VACCINATED AT DIFFERENT AGES WITH A SINGLE DOSE OF I-2 
THERMOSTABLE VACCINE BY THE I/N ROUTE. 
      Mean titer (log2) Percent Protection (%) 
one month post challenge 
6 week post vaccination 
Age at 
vaccination 
Day pre-
vaccinati
on 
Vaccinated 
chickens 
Unvaccinate
d chickens 
Vaccinat
ed 
chickens 
Unvaccinated 
chickens 
One-day 5 3.9 1 50 0 
One-week 4 4.1 1.6 60 0 
Two-weeks 2.4 4.5 1.2 82 0 
Three-weeks 1.4 4.6 0 82 0 
TABLE II. EFFICACY OF I-2 VACCINE AGAINST ND GIVEN BY I/O OR I/N ROUTES AND 
DIFFERENT DOSES. 
Route of vaccination 
and dose 
Mean HI antibody titer (log
 2) 
 
After vaccination After boostering 
Percentage 
Protection 
after  
challenge 
I/O 1/2 dose 
I/O normal dose 
I/O 2X dose 
I/N 1/2 dose 
I/N normal dose 
I/N 2X dose 
D/W normal dose 
4 
5.5 
7 
4 
4.5 
4.5 
3 
5 
6 
7.8 
4.5 
5 
5.5 
3.5 
95 
100 
100 
87 
90 
100 
46 
 
TABLE III.  COMPARISON IN VILLAGE CHICKENS OF ND-VACCINES GIVEN BY 
DIFFERENT ROUTES. 
Vaccine strain Route Mean of HI antibody titer 
before vaccination (log
 2) 
Mean of HI 
antibody titer 
after vaccination 
(log
 2) 
I 2 1/O 0.25 6 
I 2 1/N 0.5 5 
I 2 D/W 0.33 3.7 
Komarov 1/N 0.33 5.5 
Komarov D/W 0.4 3.5 
D/W: Drinking water 
I/ N: Intranasal 
I/ O: Intraocular 
DISCUSSION 
In the present study, the I-2 thermos table vaccine of ND supplied by ACIAR 
(Australia) as a master seed was tested under Sudanese conditions. The master and working 
seeds of the vaccine virus were prepared. The 50% infectivity in embryonated eggs (EID50) of 
the vaccine was estimated and found to be 10 9.13/mL the same as indicated in the 
manufacturer guideline for the vaccine production. The prepared vaccine was confirmed to be 
232
 
free from bacterial, mycoplasmal and fungal cont amination. Experimental trials to determine 
the effect of age of chickens on the protective efficacy of the vaccine were conducted.  
In this study, chicks vaccinated with the I-2 NDV thermostable vaccine administered 
intanasally at one and seven days of age gave low HI antibody titres and protection after 
challenge as compared to the older birds. There was a clear decrease in the mean antibody 
level after vaccination of one-day-old chicks while slight increase (p < 0.05) was noticed 
among the one week old birds, which was considered as insignificant. This indicates that even 
moderate levels of maternally-derived antibodies (MDA) interfered with the immune response 
to achieve vaccination at early life. These findings are clearly substantiated and in agreement 
of the previously mentioned data. However, boostering of these chicks two weeks after initial 
vaccination resulted in a slight increase (p < 0.05) in the HI titre with moderate protection 
levels after challenge. 
Vaccination of young chickens which have high levels of maternally derived antibody 
(MDA) was previously considered as one of the main problems associated with control of ND 
in many parts of the world [6, 10]. However, other researchers proved that passive immunity 
does not necessarily interfere appreciably with a vaccine applied by the nasal or ocular 
instillation and they recommend these routes for vaccinating young chicks having maternal 
immunity [9]. 
Initial vaccination of chicks at the ages of two and three weeks resulted in relatively 
comparable and better results. This  might be attributed to the gradual reduction of MDA (as 
shown in Table I) and also the progress of the immunological competence with age. As initial 
vaccination is required at an early age as much as possible in ND endemic areas and where 
the virulent type of the virus is prevalent, we assigned two weeks of age as the most reliable 
one during the course of these experiments. This  was emphasized by the fact that the percent 
protection after challenge of the control groups was zero throughout the experimental trials.  
In this investigation in on hand, better results were obtained when chicks were 
vaccinated via I/O route, resulting in high antib odies and good protection. This agreed with 
the findings of vaccination trials conducted in other African countries, using the same or other 
thermostable vaccines of ND, such as in Tanz ania [11], Mozambique [1] and Zimbabwe [8]. 
On the other hand, chicks vaccinated through the I/N route showed inferior immune responses 
and protection rates as compared to I/O but superior to D/W route. Similar findings were 
previously reported by KHEIR [14] and GAFFAR ELAMIN 
et al [12]. 
Based on these findings, the I/O route is recommended for the vaccine application 
especially when smaller flocks such as breeder replacement flocks and village backyard 
chickens have to be vaccinated. Following the virus administration into the bird conjunctiva, 
it reaches the upper respiratory tract through the naso-lacrymal duct where it multiplies to 
induce the required immune responses. However, it may be impractical to use the I/O route in 
commercial poultry units that ha ve large numbers of broilers to be immunized all at once. 
These units can consider mass vaccination methods such as D/W and spraying even though 
they result in a somewhat reduced immune response. This reduction response may occur 
using the D/W route because virus viability will be  lost at the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), 
unless high amount of NDV (
> 105 EID50) is contained in the vaccine [20].  
The effectiveness of different doses of ND-I-2 vaccine was also investigated during 
the present study. The results obtained revealed that at least double the recommended dose of 
the vaccine is required to offer total protection of chicks against challenge infection. 
233
 
Moreover, the vaccine was proved to be abso lutely safe since double or four times the 
recommended dose resulted in no adverse vaccination reactions among vaccinated chicks 
which looked normal and healthy throughout the ex perimental course. Allan [5] reported that 
an effective immune response is dependent on the presence, in the bird, of an amount 
equivalent to 10
9.5 EID50 infective particles.  
Usually mesogenic strains of NDV are used as booster vaccines because the mild live 
vaccines (those containing the lentogenic strains) do not multiply very efficiently when used 
as boosters in face of pre-existing immunity and hence secondary response that they induce is 
rarely very much higher than the primary respons e. This can be achieved by use of the more 
invasive live (intermediate) vaccines [22]. This observation was valid during the experiments 
of this study where boosting resulted in little increase (p< 0.01) in HI titres when the I-2 was 
used for repeated vaccination. Similar obs ervations were reported by RAJESWAR AND 
MASILLAMONY [18] for LaSota and B1 and by ALI [4] for K vaccine. 
Application of vaccination against ND using a wet vaccine prepared from I-2  strain in 
village chickens in the Sudan during the period 1999-2003 markedly decreased outbreaks of 
the disease in both zones and subsequently improved village chicken production. The 
epidemiologic picture of ND in the study area and benefits to villagers after implementing 
vaccination will be published in a separate article.  
CONCLUSIONS 
Our experience with production, distribution and application of I-2 vaccine has shown 
that it is feasible to produce and distribute th e vaccine in regional basis. Storage of the 
vaccine at –20 
°C in small aliquots provide s constant supply suitable for the individual small 
flocks and reduces the cost. Application of these results targeting improving food security and 
generation of supplementary cash income requi re cooperation between research institutions, 
government authorities and rural farmers. One additional benefit relies in the fact that control 
of ND in village chickens will subsequently result in reducing infections in the growing 
commercial sector. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors are very much grateful to Prof. P.B. Spradbrow from the University of 
Queenland in Australia and to Dr. Sobhi, A. M. Kheir, department  of Virology, CRVL 
(Sudan) for their kind provision of the thermo stable vaccine strain and the virulent field virus 
isolate used in the study. We would like to thank the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, Vienna, 
Austria for providing financial support to carry out this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ALDERS, R.G., FRINGE, R.,. The use of thermostable Newcastle disease vaccine in 
Mozambique. In: Improving Family Pou ltry Production in Africa. Background 
information FAO (1998). 
[2] ALEXANDER, D.J., Newcastle disease and other paramyxovirus infection.In: Diseases of 
Poultry pp. 496-519. 9
th edition. Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa, USA. 
(1991). 
[3] ALEXANDER, D.J., PARSON, G., MARSHAL, R., Infection of fowls with Newcastle 
disease virus by food contam inated with pigeon feces. Veterinary Record 115: 601-
602 (1984). 
234
 
[4] ALI, B.E. Response of chicks to vaccination with K strain of NDV under field conditions. 
Indian Veterinary Journal 55: 508-512 (1978). 
[5] ALLAN, W.H., The problem of Newcastle disease. Nature (London) 234: 129-131 (1971). 
[6] ALLAN, W.H., The effect of neonatal vaccination against Newcastle disease in the 
presence of maternal antibody. Veterinary Record 39: 645-646 (1973). 
[7] ALLAN, W. H., LANCASTER, J.E., TOTH, B., Newcastle disease vaccines: their 
production and use. FAO Animal Production, Rome, Series No. 10 FAO (1978). 
[8] ANITA, V.K., Results from Newcastle disease vaccine trials in Zimbabwe. Improving 
Family Poultry Production in Africa. Background information. FAO presented in 
Rabat Morocco, Feb 1999 (1999). 
[9] BORNSTEIN, S., ARAZI, A.R., SAMBERG, Y., Some aspects of congenital passive 
immunity to Newcastle disease in chicks. The transfer of haemagglutination inhibitors 
from the maternal yolk to the chick. American Veterinary Research Journal 13: 373-
378 (1952). 
[10] DAWSON, P.S., ALLAN, W.H., The control of Newcastle disease by vaccinatio. In: 4th 
European Poultry Conference . British Poultry Science Ltd. Edinburgh. 591-598, 
Central Veterinary Laboratory, New Haw, Weybridge, Surrey, England (1973). 
[11] FOSTER, A., CHITUKURO, H.R., TUPPA, E., A field trial with thermostable V4 
Newcastle disease vaccine in village in central Tanzania. Proceedings in FPD 
Workshop, M. Bour, Sengal Dec. 9-13. I ssues in family poultry Research and 
Development (1997). 
[12] GAFFAR ELAMIN, M.A., KHALAFALLA, A.I., AHMED, S.M., Observation on the 
use of Komarov strain of Newcastle  disease vaccine in the Sudan. 
Tropical Animal 
Health and Production 25: 151-154 (1993). 
[13] HANSON, R.P., Spalatin, J., Thermostability of the haemagglutination of Newcastle 
disease virus, as a strain Marker in epizootiologic studies. Avian Diseases 22: 659-665 
(1978). 
[14] KHEIR, S.A.M., Immune response to Newcastle disease vaccine (Komarov strain) given 
in drinking water. The Sudan Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry 31: 
14-19 (1992). 
[15] KIM, S. J., SPRADBROW, P. B., Some properties of lentogenic Australian Newcastle 
disease virus. Veterinary Microbiology 3: 129-141 (1978). 
[16] MEULEMANS, G., Control by vaccination. In: Alexander, D.J. (ed). Newcastle disease, 
pp. 318-332. Kluwer Academic Publisher, Boston, MA, USA (1988). 
[17] MURVEY, F.A., GIBBS, E.P., HORZINEK, M.C., SUDDERT, M.J., Paramyxovirdae: 
Veterinary Virology, 412-428, third edition Academic Press USA (1999). 
[18] RAJESWAR, J.J., MASILAMONY, P.R., Spray vaccine against ND. Indian Veterinary 
Journal 70: 404 (1993). 
[19] SPRADBRO, P.B., Newcastle disease in village chickens. Control with thermostable oral 
vaccine. Proceedings of an international workshop held in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia, 
6-10 October, 1991. Pp. 189, ACIAR Proceedings No. 39 (1992). 
[20] SHUAIB, M.A., SPALATIN, J., MCMILLAN, B., HANSON, R.P., Studies on the 
development of a pelleted Newcas tle disease virus (NDV) vaccine. Vaccine 3: 385-
388 (1985). 
[21] VILLEGAS, P,. PURCHASE, HG., Titration of Biological suspensions. In: Isolation and 
Identification of Avian Pathogens 2nd edit., Edited by Hitchner, SB, Domermuth, CH, 
Purchase, HG. and Williams, JE., Pub by: The American Association of Avian 
Pathologists. P. 124-128 (1983). 
[22] ZAKIA, A.M., ALI, B.H., MAHASIN, E., AMAL, M.M.., (The serological response of 
chicks to intranasal ND vaccination and re-vaccination. 
Sudan Journal of Veterinary 
Research 4: 99-103 1983). 
235
 
THE PERFORMANCE OF VILLAGE CHICKENS IN SELECTED RURAL 
AREAS OF UGANDA, GIVEN NEWCASTLE DISEASE I-2 
THERMOSTABLE VACCINE, LEVAMISOLE® TREATMENT AND FEED 
SUPPLEMENTATION. 
J. ILLANGO1, M. OCAIDO2, G. MUSISI1, A. ETOORI1, H. OLUPOT3,  
N. MABONGA4 
1Livestock Health Research Institute, Tororo, Uganda. 
2Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda. 
3District Agricultural Office, Soroti, Uganda 
4District Veterinary Office, Mbale, Uganda 
Abstract 
Poultry health and management interventions for Newcastle disease, endo-parasite control and 
feed supplementation were introduced to a free-range poultry production system in six villages in two 
Agro-ecological zones of Uganda to improve chicken productivity. Newcastle disease vaccination 
using a locally produced I-2 thermostable vaccine of Embryo-infective dose (EID50) of 108 per ml and 
LaSota cold chain vaccine of Embryo infective dose (EID50) of 109 ml, one for each zone, where given 
to chickens by the eye drop method on a 3 month-interval-vaccination schedule for 9 months. Endo 
parasite control using Levamisole ® was given twice in the wet and once in the dry season. Feed 
supplementation, using commercial chick mash, at estimated quantity of 30 gm per chick per day was 
provided for chicks for 3 months in two villages. Serum – samples, collected one month after each 
vaccination from 8 chickens per household were tested by the Haemagglutination inhibition test (HI). 
Faecal samples, also collected from 4 chickens per household were used to establish the helminth 
parasite infestation rates. The chick numbers and their weights were established weekly in each 
household for 3 months. Protection in chickens against Newcastle disease increased to mean HI log
2 
titres of 4.5 and 3.7 with mean protection levels of 83% and 80% for I–2 thermostable and LaSota 
vaccines respectively. Mean parasite infestation rates dropped by 27%. Mean chick survival rates 
improved by 29% and chick age weights increased significantly. Overall, there was an increase in 
poultry stock numbers, mean household flock sizes and egg production. The health interventions were 
cost effective by cost benefit analysis. 
INTRODUCTION 
Free-range poultry production is the most predominant poultry production system in 
rural areas of Uganda, as in other African countries [1,2]. It is characterized by low inputs by 
in terms of health care for chickens, supplementary feeding, housing and other husbandry 
practices [3]. The chicken also have poor genetic potential. The overall effect is low 
productivity and high mortality rates in poultry. 
Newcastle disease (ND) is  the most important poultry disease due to the high 
prevalence, morbidity and mortality, [4,5,6]. The control of ND under free-range conditions is 
difficult to achieve. Vaccination is rarely provided for village chicken except in isolated cases 
in peri-urban areas [1]. This is due to the in accessibility of the birds, lack of cold chain 
facilities for the vaccine and logistical pr oblems. There is also general lack of awareness by 
rural farmers of the need to vaccinate chickens. The development of the ND thermostable 
vaccines was seen as an effort to offset some of the cold chain and logistical problems in 
vaccine distribution, delivery and use, thus making them more appropriate for use in 
vaccinating chickens in remote rural villages [7].  Parasites are also important in free-range 
chickens [8]. In Uganda, high prevalence of helminths in village chickens has been noted 
[9.10]. 
236
 
Feed resources, though abundant in Uga nda, are rarely provided for free-range 
chicken. This study was designed to assess the performance of village chicken given the 
locally produced I-2 thermostable vaccine for pr otection against ND, parasite control using 
Levamisole®, feed supplementation for chicks. A co st-benefit study was done to assess the 
impact of the interventions.  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
In two agro-ecological zones of Uganda, namely agro-pastoral and mountain zones, 
six villages were selected two per zone. These are areas of high rural poultry production under 
free-range management system [1, 11]. 
A total of 72 farmers were selected in the 6 villages on basis of household poultry 
characteristics, gender of the owner and capacity to participate in project activities. 
Farmer sensitization meetings were organized in the villages to explain the project 
objectives and proposed interventions. In add ition simple record keeping was introduced to 
the farmers using prepared simplified record forms.  
Following introduction of farmers to simple record keeping during the sensitisation 
meetings, each farmer was required to enter poultry household data. This data was used to 
estimate the poultry study population. 
A baseline study was conducted to assess the current health and production status of 
chicken in the project villages. Farmers were  interviewed. The recorded household poultry 
data was confirmed. The chickens were examin ed. Serum and faecal samples were collected 
from at least 8 birds in each household. Seru m samples were collected by bleeding the 
chicken. The samples were tested by the Haemagglutination inhibition test [12] Faecal 
samples were also collected from 4 chickens in each household. They were processed and 
examined for parasite eggs [8] 
Two vaccines were used. A locally produced I-2 thermostable vaccine for chicken in 
the Mountain zone and LaSota for chicken in the agro-pastoral zone. The vaccines were given 
by the eye drop method, each bird receiving one dose per drop, using a calibrated eye dropper 
[13]. Vaccination was repeated every three months by the same methods and using the same 
vaccines for 9 months. 
Endo parasite control in chickens was being done in 2 villages in each district using 
levamisole
® (Norbrook, Africa E.PZ. Ltd). This was given following manufacturer’s 
instructions. Each farmer was given instruc tions for use in drinking water depending on 
poultry flock size. The deworming exercise was done twice in the wet season and once in the 
dry season. 
Commercial chick mash was provided for chicks in two villages in the Mountain zone 
following persistent high chick mortalities, in spite of the two health interventions for 9 
months. This was decided after consultation with the field staff, assessment of the current 
poultry feed costs and transport costs of raw materials if feed were to be formulated locally. 
Chicks were provided with chick mash for 3 months. The number of chicks in each household 
was established. This was used to estimate the quantity of feed supplement required at a rate 
of 30 grams per chick per day [14]. Each farmer was required to feed chicks and mother hens 
with chick mash and water in a confined place / house or enclosure before releasing and later 
237
 
in the day to scavenge around the homestead. In addition each farmer was required to provide 
any other household supplements available e.g. food leftovers. One village in which no feed 
supplement was provided for chicks was used as control village. Every week, the numbers of 
chicks in each household were counted, their weights were also established by weighing 2–4 
chicks of the same age using spring balance to establish average age weights. 
Serum samples were collected and testing. Serum samples were collected from 4 
chickens in each household by bleeding them be fore ND vaccination. These were tested by 
the Haemagglutination Inhibition Test (HI) [12] to assess the pre-vaccination sero-status. 
Serum samples were again coll ected as above from chickens in the same households. The 
Serum samples collected were tested as above to assess the level of protection. 
A Newcastle disease challenge test was conducted for vaccinated chickens when a 
protection level of more than  90% was reached after tes ting serum-samples from randomly 
selected village chickens. Five vaccinated ch ickens were purchased from each of the project 
villages for the challenge test. For control, un-vaccinated local chicken from non–project area 
and exotic chicken reared on station were used. A locally isolated virulent ND virus isolate of 
Mean Death time of 52 hours at dilution of 10
-9 was used for challenge in an isolated building 
on station. Each chicken received 0.1 ml of the virulent virus strain given intranasally. The 
birds were observed for 10 days. Feed and water were provided. 
Faecal samples were collected from 4 chickens in each household during baseline 
studies to assess the parasite infestation rates. After Levamisole ® treatment faecal samples 
were again collected from 4 chickens in the same households. The faecal samples were 
examined in the laboratory [8]. 
Each poultry owner / keeper was require d to enter data on poultry stock numbers, 
losses, consumption and sales every month on prepar ed sheets. This data were be used to 
assesses household poultry production and dynamics 
RESULTS  
Project areas two agro-ecological zones with distinct farming systems climate, soil 
types and ethnicity. The agro – pastoral zone is a mixed life stock and crop farming zone in 
low lying areas in eastern Uganda. It is pre dominantly a cattle keeping area. Cattle are used 
for draught power in crop production. Other ma jor livestock are goats and poultry. The soils 
are light sandy and loamy sandy. Rainfall is generally low with two peak periods. The area is 
sparsely populated and this allows for communa l grazing practice in livestock management 
and free range poultry production. A total of 32 farmer s were selected (Table I) 
The Mountain zone is high altitude zone with volcanic soils. The vegetation is mainly 
bamboo forest in the high lands and savannah in the low lands. Major crops are coffee and 
bananas grown on the slopes of the hills. The area is densely populated which can not allow 
high cattle and goat populations. Poultry keeping is major livestock enterprise. A total of 39 
farmers were selected (Table I)  
The population distributi ons as depicted in Table II had different protection status: 
before the intervention 51% in the agro-pastoral region compared to only 9% in the mountains 
were protected against ND (Table III). Both populations had high parasite counts (Table IV).  
238
 
TABLE I. PROJECT AREA. 
Zone Districts No. of Villages Participating farmers 
   F M T 
Agro-pastoral  Soroti 3 22 10 32 
Mountain Mbale 3 29 10 39 
Total  6 51 20 71 
F = female farmers 
M = male farmers 
T = total number of farmers. 
TABLE II. POULTRY PRODUCTION PARAMETERS BEFORE INTERVENTION. 
Poultry Flock Structures Zone Villages 
Hens Cocks Growers Chicks 
Total Flock 
size 
ranges 
Egg 
production 
Mountain 3 111 28 133 146 418 7-129 164 
Agro 
pastoral  
3 163 32 242 156 593 1-87 175 
Totals 6 274 60 375 302 1011  339 
TABLE III. POULTRY HEALTH PARAMETERS BEFORE INTERVENTION. 
Zone No. 
samples 
Distribution of HI log2 titre No. 
+ve 
Mean 
HI titre 
Protecti
on 
level %
Hi log  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9    
Agro 
pastoral  
68 10 8 14 8 9 7 3 7 1 0 35 3.0 51 
Mountai
n  
62 25 27 4 1 0 3 0 2 0 0 6 1.08 9% 
(a) Newcastle disease pre-vaccination sero – status and protection levels in chicken by Haemagglutination 
Inhibition (HI) test 
HI log
2 titre of 3 or above is considered positive and protecting against ND [12]. 
TABLE IV. HELMINTH PARASITE INFESTATION RATE IN CHICKEN. 
Zone No
.  
No. with 
paras. 
parasite 
infest. rate 
% 
Percentage infestation rate of major parasites identified 
    Ascaridia Hererakis Hymeno-
leptis 
 
    Capillaria Strongyloides Reilletina. Coccidia 
Mountain  64 31 48% 0 31 27 17 0 20 4.7 
Agro-
pastoral  
 64 26 40% 3 7 0 3 50 26 11 
Interestingly after intervention the mount ain population had much higher protection 
levels than the agro-pastoral area (Table V), which might result from the use of thermostable 
vaccine in the mountains versus the traditional La  Sota strain. Never the eless the protection 
levels were suffciant to protect all birds against a challenge with NDV wild type (Table VI) 
Standart anti-endoparasitic treatment helped to reduce the worm burden by 50–75% 
(Table VII) 
239
 
TABLE V.  POST VACCINATION SEROLOGICAL STATUS AND PERCENTAGE 
PROTECTION LEVELS BY HI TEST IN VACCINATED CHICKEN. 
  Months 
Zone Vaccine used  0 3 6 9 
Mountain I-2 Mean HI log 2 titres 3.0 3.7 4.7 5.2 
  % protection level 51% 70% 90% 90% 
Agro - Lasota Mean HI log 2 titres 1.08 2.6 4.7 3.75 
pastoral  % production level 9% 52% 96% 92% 
Mean log2 titre of 3 or above is considered positive and protecting against NCD [12] 
TABLE VI . NCD CHALLENGE RESULTS IN RANDOMLY SELECTED VACCINATED 
CHICKEN. 
Days post 
challenge 
test 
Number surviving / dead birds 
 LA LA LA I-2  I-2 I-2 NV NS 
0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
1 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
2 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
3 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 4 
4 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 1 
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 0 
6 5 5 5 5 5 5 0 0 
7 5 5 5 5 5 5 0 0 
8 5 5 5 5 5 5 0 0 
No. of chickens alive / dead 
LA _ Vaccinated with Lasota vaccine 
I-2  - Vaccinated with I – 2 vaccine 
NV – Non - vaccinated local village birds 
NS – Non-Vaccinated exotic birds kept on station 
Helminth infestation rates in chicken after Levamisole® treatment  
TABLE VII. PARASITE INFESTATION RATES.  
Zone  Time No. No. 
with 
paras. 
Infest. 
rate % 
Parasites species present in samples (%) 
     Ascaridia Heterakis Hymenolepis  
     Capillaria Strongy loides Railletina Coccid.
Montaine  BT 64 31 48% 0% 31% 27.5% 17% 0% 20% 4.7% 
Agro 
pastoral  
BT 64 26 40% 3% 7% 0% 3% 50% 26% 11% 
Montaine AT 56 13 23% 23% 23% 0% 38% 0% 0% 15% 
Agro 
pastoral  
AT 54 6 11% 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 
BT – Before treatments, AT – After treatment 
Poultry production after interventions  
The flock size after intervention doubled alr eady after 6 months (Table VIII). In this 
calculation a certain offtake of birds is not taken into account. The number of cocks for 
instance did not match the herd structure development. This is as well evident in Table IX. 
240
 
TABLE VIII. (I)MONTAINE ZONE AT 3 MONTHS. 
Village 
code 
Flock size 
ranges 
Flock structures Egg production 
  Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total  
D 5-36 52 4 64 48 168 124 
E 13-68 37 15 52 64 168 93 
F 5-34 31 4 43 52 130 113 
 Totals 120 23 159 164 466 330 
After 6 months 
(II) MONTAINE ZONE AT 6 MONTHS. 
Village 
code 
Flock size 
ranges 
Flock structures Egg 
production 
  Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total  
D 7-67 72 10 117 230 429 224 
E 14-180 56 17 93 150 247 129 
F 5-48 68 28 139 99 334 96 
 Totals 146 55 349 479 1079 499 
After 9 months 
(III) MONTAINE ZONE AT 9 MONTHS. 
Village 
code 
Flock size 
ranges 
Flock structures Egg 
production
  Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total  
D 7-114 73 9 55 165 302 253 
E 6-103 58 23 88 191 390 149 
F 5-27 55 9 87 121 272 96 
 Totals 216 41 230 477 964 498 
 
(IV) TOTAL POULTRY POPULATIONS AND EGG PRODUCTION. 
Months Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Totals Egg 
production 
3 120 23 159 164 466 330 
6 146 55 349 479 1029 499 
9 216 41 230 477 964 488 
Total 482 119 738 1120 2459 1327 
 
TABLE IX. SUMMARY POULTRY PRODUCTION DATA FOR MONTAINE ZONE. 
Parameter  Baseline At 3 mont hs At 6 months At 9 months 
Flock sizes 7–129 5–68 5–180 5–114 
Mean flock sizes  22 20 34 29 
Cock hen ratio 1:4 1:5 1:3 1:5 
Total poultry  418 466 1023 895 
Total egg produced 164 330 499 498 
 
241
 
TABLE X. POULTRY DYNAMICS. 
(I) Proportion of dynamic and remaining poultry stock. 
Months  Total flocks Dyna mic flock Remaining flock 
 No. No. % No. % 
3 1001 535 43.4% 466 46.5% 
6 1829 806 44.0% 1023 56.5% 
9 1314 419 31.8% 896 68.2% 
Total 4144 1760 40.8% 2453 59.2% 
 
(II) Proportion of 4 major factors in poultry dynamics identified.  
Months  Dynamic 
Flock 
Chicken losses Chicken 
consumption 
Chicken sales Chicken ex-
change for 
livestock 
 No. No. % No. % No. % No. % 
3 535 381 72.1% 71 13.2% 61 11.4% 22 4.1% 
6 806 513 63.6% 130 16.1% 93 11.5% 70 8.6% 
9 419 330 78% 45 10.7% 19 4.5% 25 5.9% 
Total  1760 1224 69.5% 246 13.9% 173 9.8% 117 6.6% 
 
(III) Chicken losses – Proportion of different chicken groups.  
Months  Total 
Chicken 
loses 
Chicks Growers Hens Cocks 
 No. No. % No. % No. % No. % 
3 381 204 53.3% 103 27% 55 14.4% 19 4.9% 
6 513 220 42.8% 117 22.8% 156 30.4% 20 3.8% 
9 332 252 76.3% 60 18% 17 5.1% 3 0.6% 
Total  1224 676 55.2% 280 22.8% 228 18.6% 42 3.4% 
Both populations increased in size during th e first 6 months of interventions (Table 
X). The decline specifically in the agro-pastoral area is due to civil unrest during this time. 
TABLE XI. AGRO-PASTORAL ZONE; AT 3 MONTHS. 
Village 
code 
Flock sizes Flock structures 
  Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total Egg pro. 
A 2-35 75 19 68 72 234 102 
B  4-38 109 28 161 60 358 95 
C  2-58 81 21 98 92 292 153 
 Totals 265 68 327 224 884 350 
 
After 6 months. 
Village code Flock size ranges Flock structures 
  Hens CocksGrowersChicksTotalEgg prod.
A 3-34 84 18 128 108 338 184 
B 2-29 157 23 361 119 660 104 
C 5-30 155 28 245 113 541 327 
 Totals 396 69 734 340 1539 615 
 
242
 
After 9 months. 
Village 
code 
Poultry 
flock size  
Flock structures 
  Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total Egg pro. 
A 4-34 59 28 69 34 190 193 
B 2-33 66 18 71 67 222 111 
C 6-59 96 50 242 102 490 96 
 Totals 221 96 382 203 902 400 
Summary 
Months Hens Cocks Growers Chicks Total Egg 
production 
3 265 68 327 224 884 350 
6 396 69 734 340 1539 615 
9 221 96 382 203 902 400 
Total  882 233 1443 767 3325 1365 
TABLE XII. SUMMARY POULTRY PRODUCTION DATA FOR AGRO-PASTORAL ZONE. 
Parameter  Baseline At 3 mont hs At 6 months At 9 months 
Flock sizes 1–87 2–58 2–34 2–59 
Mean flock sizes  16 17 16 17 
Cock hen ratio 1:5 1:4 1:5 1:2 
Total poultry 
population  
593 884 1539 902 
Total egg prod.  175 350 615 400 
TABLE XIII. POULTRY DYNAMICS 
(a) Proportion of dynamic and remaining poultry flock 
Months Total poultry flock Dy namic flock Remaining flock 
  No. % No. % 
3 1324 440 33% 884 67% 
6 2333 794 34% 1539 66% 
9 1961 1059 54% 902 46% 
Total  5618 2293 40.8% 3325 59.2% 
 
(a) Proportions of 4 major factors in poultry dynamics 
Months  Dynamic 
flock 
Chicken losses Chicken 
consumption 
Chicken sales Chicken 
exchange for 
livestock 
 No. No. % No. % No. % No. % 
3 440 298 67.6% 100 22.7% 29 6.5% 10 2.2% 
6 794 560 70.5% 170 21.4% 44 5.5% 20 2.5% 
9 1059 538 50.8% 342 32.2% 119 11.2% 60 5.6% 
Total  2293 1396 60.8% 612 26.6% 192 8.4% 90 3.9% 
 
 
 
 
 
243
 
(b) Chicken losses – proportions of different chicken groups  
Months  Total 
loses 
Chicken losses Growers Hens Cocks 
 No. No. % No. % No. % No. % 
3 298 178 59% 38 12.7% 78 26% 6 2% 
6 560 378 67.8% 75 13.44% 92 16.5% 15 2.6% 
9 538 438 81.2% 44 8.2% 46 8.5% 10 1.8% 
Total  1396 994 71.2% 157 11.2% 216 15.4% 31 2.2% 
Effects of feed supplementation of chicks in Mountain zone 
TABLE XIV. EFFECT OF FEED SUPPLEMETATION ON CHICK SURVIVAL RATES.  
Test village – 1 
Time months No. of 
households 
No. chicks Feed 
quantity (kg)
No. of 
chicks lost 
% chick 
mortality 
% chick 
survival rate 
0 10 313 0 154 49.2% 50.7% 
1 10 159 143 9 5.6% 94% 
2 10 169 152 13 7.7% 92% 
3 10 335 301 79 23.5% 76% 
 
Test village – 2 
Time months No. of 
households 
No. chicks Feed 
quantity (kg)
No. of 
chicks lost 
% chick 
mortality 
% chick 
survival rate
0 10 241 0 68 28% 71% 
1 10 173 155 13 7.5% 92% 
2 10 192 172 7 3.7% 96% 
3 10 234 210 23 9.8% 90% 
 
Control village – 3 
Time months No. of 
households 
No. chicks Feed 
quantity (kg)
No. of 
chicks lost 
% chick 
mortality 
% chick 
survival rate 
0 15 136 0 30 22% 77.9% 
1 15 231 0 97 41.9% 58% 
2 15 286 0 165 57.6% 42% 
3 15 174 0 88 50.5% 49% 
TABLE XV. EFFECT OF FEED SUPPLEMETATION ON CHICK AGE WEIGHTS. 
Age 
weeks 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Weights 
(g) in test 
villages 
25-
125 
125-
150 
137-
250 
208-
825 
375-
750 
875 800-
1000 
525-
1065 
- 925 - - 
Mean 78 137 194 427 583 875 900 779 - 925 - - 
Weights 
(g) in 
control 
village 
25-50 50 112-
250 
100-
291 
250-
400 
525 - 550 - 625 - 1625 
Mean 38 50 183 199 341 525 - 550 - 625 - 1625 
 - No chicks or died Supplement feed provision for ch icks using commercial chick mash significantly improved 
the weight gains ( P<0.001, t = 5.2, df = 9) 
244
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
123456789 1 0
We e k s
 
FIG. 1. Results of the weights of chicks fed supp lementary mash compared to controls during a 10 
week period (♦ - interventions, ■ – controls) 
COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF THE INTERVENTIONS IN RURAL POULTRY 
PRODUCTION IN TWO ZONES OF UGANDA 
Interventions for health 
The following interventions were maintained during the trials 
Mountain Zone 
• Newcastle disease vaccination using th e I-2 thermostable vaccine produced 
locally using SPF eggs.  NCD Vaccination done three times in one year using a 
three months vaccination schedule. 
• Endo parasite control using levamisole®. 
• Supplementary feed for chicken in two villages using commercial chick mash 
Major Inputs: 
• Vaccine production – SPF eggs, seed virus (Master) and laboratory supplies 
• Staff allowances during production 
• Fuel cost for incidental movements 
 
Since work was done within the Institute, staff allowances and fuel expenses were 
limited. The major expenses were in the cost of SPF eggs. 
 
 
245
 
Cost calculation for 150 SPF eggs 
Cost of eggs  = 172.5 Euro 
Air freight  = 200 Euro 
Handling costs = 22,230 Ug shs 
Clearing costs  = 99,450 Ug shs 
Transportation to labs = 10,000 Ug shs 
Cost of eggs  = 2350 x 172.5 405,375Ug shs  
Air freight = 470,000 Ug shs 
Total cost of 150 SPF eggs + clearing, 
handling, and transportation  
=  1,007,055 Ug shs 
For this purpose, cost of vaccine production 
can be assumed to approximately 
= 1,007,055 Ug shs 
Exchange rate for 1 Euro approximately 2350 Ug shs 
150 SPF eggs produced approximately 140,000 doses of I–2 vaccine of EID 
50 108 per ml,  
140,000 vaccine doses cost 1007,055 Ug shs.  
Cost of 1 dose of vaccine = 1007.055 ÷ 140,000 = 7.19 Ug shs. 
Vaccination of chicken with I–2 vaccine 
Vaccination cost = cost of vaccine + field expenses 
  = cost of vaccine + ( Staff allowances + Fuel costs) 
assuming 1 dose of vaccine was used per bird each time – calibrated eye dropper was 
used. 
1st vaccination 
No of birds vaccinated = 466 
Cost of field expenses was 256,200/= cost of vaccinating 466  
= cost of 466 doses of vaccine + field expenses 
=  ( 466 x 7.19) + 256.200 
= 3350.54 + 256,200 
= 259550.54 
Cost of vaccinating 1 bird  = 259550.54 
÷ 466 birds 
    = 556.9 Ug Shs 
 
2nd vaccination 
No. of birds vaccinated   = 763 
Cost of field expenses was   = 327,000/= 
Cost of vaccinating 763 birds  = (763 x 7.19) + 327,000 
     = 5485.97 + 327,000 
     = 332,485.97 
Cost of vaccinating 1 bird was = 435.76 
 
246
 
3rd vaccination 
No. of birds     =  943 
Cost of their vaccination was   = (943 x 7.19) + 330800 (field) 
     = 337580.17 
cost of vaccinating 1 bird was  = 33750.17 
÷ 943  
     = 357.9 Ug Shs 
Average cost of vaccinating 1 bird (once) was = (556.9 + 435.7 + 357.9) ÷ 3 
  = 450.1 Ug shs 
Three vaccinations were given 
cost of vaccinating 1 bird ( for 1 year) 3 times: 450.1 x 3 = 1350.5 Ug shs 
Total cost of vaccine used was 3350.50 + 5485. 9 + 6780 = 15,615/= at a cost of 7.19/= per 
dose 
 
1 US dollar approximately 1940 Ug shs  
 
Average cost of vaccinating 1 bird (1x) was 0.23 U$ 
Average cost of vaccinating 1 bird 3x) was 0.69 U$ 
 
Endo parasite control using Levamisole® 
Parasite control : Cost of Levamisole® + field expenses 
   Cost of Levamisole ® (Staff allowances + field expenses) 
since this activity was done during vaccination, the no field expenses had to covered.  
1st Deworming (Wet season) 
No. of bottles of Levamisole® used = 2 each costing 2,500/= 
Cost of Levamisole® used was     5,000/= 
No. of birds dewormed ( 2 villages)    336 
Cost of deworming 1 bird  = 5000/336  14.8/= 
2nd Deworming ( Wet season) 
No. of bottles of Levamisole® used = 3 each costing 2,500/= 
Cost of Levamisole® used was  2,500/= x 3  7,500/= 
No. of birds dewormed ( 2 villages)     429 
Cost of deworming 1 bird  = 7500/429  17.4/= 
3rd Deworming ( Dry season) 
No. of bottles of Levamisole® used = 4 each costing 2,500/= 
Cost of Levamisole® used was  2,500/= x 4 10,000/= 
No. of birds dewormed ( 2 villages)    692 
Cost of deworming 1 bird  = 10000/692  14.4/= 
 
The average cost of deworming/bird (14.8 + 17.4 + 14.4) / 3 = 15.5 
Deworming was done 3 times above ( 2 wet + 1 dry)  
Cost deworming 1 bird ( x3) was = 3 x 15.5 = 46.5 Ug shs  
247
 
Cost of health interventions provided for 1 bird/year for in the Montaine zone was = 1350.5 + 
46.5 = 1397 Ug shs.  
At the rate of 1 dollar for 1940 Ug shs 1397 Ugshs = 0.72 US $ 
 
Therefore cost of health provision for 1 bird for 1 year (Vaccination + deworming) was 0.72 
US $ 
 
Financial analysis of the health interventions for village chicken in the Mountain zone 
Interventions   - ND vaccination using the I-2 vaccine 
   - Deworming using Levamisole ® 
Main inputs:  
Vaccination 
Total cost of I–2 vaccine used is estimated at 15,615/=  
Deworming 
Total cost of Levamisole
® used is estimated at 22,500/= 
Field expenses 
During vaccination and deworming = 914,000/= 
 
Total variable costs   = 952,115/= 
Cost of initial chicken  = 691,100/= 
Total inputs   = 1,643,215 = 847 US $ 
 
Out puts. 
Eggs –Each egg estimated to cost 100/= =0.05 US $ 
 
Egg output value (1440)   = 144,000/= 
Value of Eggs from sales (419) = 41,900/= 
Value of Eggs consumed   = 120,600/= 
Value of eggs hatched   = 650,000/= 
Total value of egg out put  = 956,600/= 493US $ 
 
Chicken value 
Average village chicken estimated to cost 2700/=  
output value of chicken sold  = 869,100/= 
Value of chicken consumed  = 866,100/= 
Value of chicken exchanged for livestock = 629,300/= 
End stock value of chicken  = 1,297,700 
Total out put value of chicken  = 3,662,800 ~1,888 US $ 
Income from chicken enterprise  = 956,600 + 3,662,800 
      =  4,619,400/= ~ 2381 US $ 
 
Gross margin = 4,619,400–1,643, 215 =2,976,185/= 1,534 US $ 
Value of chicken lost  = 1,655,100/= 
Gross margin – value of chicken lost  = 1,312,085/= 
With 50% reduction of the losses  = 827,550/= 
248
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
9 1 21 51 82 12 4
M onths
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
1000
1020
1040
1060
BCR Flock size
 
FIG. 2. Projected variations of benefit cost ratio  and flock sizes up to 24 months when farmers adopt 
routine vaccination and deworming in the AGRO -PASTORAL ZONE 
Interventions in the agro-pastoral zone 
• Newcastle disease Vaccination done using the cold chain Lasota vaccine 
purchased from local stockists of Veterinary drugs. 
• Endo parasite control using levamisole® 
Major Inputs  
Cost of vaccine. 
Vaccination costs: cost of the vaccine + field expenses. 
1st Vaccination  
No. of birds       = 884 
Cost of field expenses claimed    = 663,400 
Cost of vaccine = 4000/= per bottle for 1000 doses 
No. of bottles used 4=4x4,000=16,000/= for 4,000 doses  
Cost of vaccinating 884 birds = 663,400 + 16,000  =  679,400  
Cost of vaccinating 1 birds = 663,400/884   = 768.5 
2nd Vaccination  
No. of birds       = 1529 
Cost of field expenses was     = 670,200 
Cost of vaccine = 4 bottles = 4 x 4000 = 16,000/= for 4000 doses  
No. of vaccinating 1539 birds = 670200 + 16,000  =  686,200 
No. of vaccinating 1 bird = 686,200/1539    = 445.8 
 
249
 
3rd Vaccination  
No. of birds       = 902 
Cost of field expenses was     = 780,000 
Cost of vaccine      = 16,000  
Cost of vaccinating 902 birds = 7800000 + 16,000  =  796,000 
Cost of vaccinating 1 bird = 796,000/902    = 882.4 
Average cost vaccinating 1 bird = (768.5 + 445.8 +882.4) / 3 = 698.Ug shs 
 
Cost of vaccinating 1 bird ( x 3) = 698 x 3  =  2094/= 
Cost of 1 dose of vaccine = 4000 / 1000   =  4/=. 
Field expenses for vaccinating 1 bird was 698–4  =  694 
Field expenses for vaccinating 1 birds (3x) = 694 x 3 =  2,082 
Cost of vaccinating 1 bird ( x 1) = 698 / 1940  =  0.36 US $ 
     (x3) = 2094 / 1940  =  1.08 US $ 
 
Total cost of vaccination used was 24.7 US $. 
 
Endo parasite control in the Agro – pastoral zone 
1st Deworming – Wet season. 
No. of bottles of levamisole® used 2 @ 2500  = 5000/= 
No. of birds in 2 villages    = 592 
Cost of deworming 1 bird = 5000/592   = 8.4 Ug shs 
 
2
nd Deworming – Wet season. 
No. of bottles of levamisole® used 3 x 25000  = 7500/= 
No. of birds       = 998 
Cost of deworming 1 bird = 7500/998   = 7.5 Ug shs 
 
3
rd Deworming – Dry season. 
No. of bottles of levamisole used 2 x 25000   = 5000/= 
No. of birds       = 412 
Cost of deworming 1 bird = 5000/412   = 12.1 Ug shs 
 
Average cost of deworming 1 bird = (8.4 + 7.5 + 12.1)/ 3 = 9.3 Ug shs 
 
Cost of deworming 1 bird (x3) = 9.3 x 3    = 27.9 Ug shs 
 
Therefore cost of deworming 1 bird in the year was 27.9 Ug shs 
 
Cost of health intervention for 1 bird for 1 ye ar was cost of vaccine + cost of deworming = 
2094 + 27.9      = 2121 Ug shs 
 
 
250
 
Main Inputs 
Vaccination  
Cost of vaccine used   = 48,000/=  
Deworming 
Total cost of Levamisole  = 17,500/= 
Field expenses   = 2,113,600/= 
Total variable costs   = 2,179,100/=  
Cost of initial chicken  = 969,600/= 
Total inputs   = 3,148,700/= 1,623 US $ 
Out puts. 
Eggs  
Each out value   = 154,000/= 
Value of eggs from sales = 3,800/= 
Value of eggs consumed = 87,300/= 
Value of eggs hatched  = 714,700/= 
Total out put value of eggs = 959,100/= 494 US $ 
Chicken 
Output value of chicken sold    = 719,700/= 
Output value of chicken consumed   = 1,652,400/= 
Output value of chicken exchanged for livestock = 282,600/= 
End – stock value of chicken    = 1,656,200/= 
Total out put value from chicken   = 4,310,900= 2,222 US $ 
Total output value from chicken and eggs  = 5,270,000/= 2,716 US $ 
Gross margin     = 2,121,300/= 1,093 US $ 
value of chicken lost     = 1,422,200/= 
Gross margin - value of chicken lost  = 699,100/= 
50% reduction of losses    = 711,100/= 
gross margin after 505 reduction of losses = 2,832,400/= 
 
50% reduction of the losses    = 827,550/= 
251
 
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
9 1 21 51 82 12 4
M o n th s after in terv en tio n
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
BCR Fl ock si ze
 
FIG. 3. Projected variations of Benefit cost ratio and flock size up to 24 months after farmers adopt 
routine vaccination and deworming in the Agro – pastoral zone  
Supplementary feeding for chicks using commercial chick mash in Mountain zone 
Inputs 
Cost of 1 kg of feed     = 378 
Total quantity of feed provided   = 1133 kg 
Total cost of chick mash provided for 3 months = 428,274/= 
Field expenses for 3 months    = 893,650 
Total variable costs     = 1,321,924 
Cost of initial value of chick stock  332 x 500 = 166,000 
Total inputs      1,488,094 ~767 US $ 
Output  
Growers  
Average value of one grower     = 1,000 
Total No. of growers     = 569 
Total value of growers 569 x 1000   = 569,000/= 
No. of chick loses      = 237 
Value of chick losses 237 x 500   = 118,500/= 
 
With 100% survival 
Total No. of growers     = 901 
Total value 901 x 1000    = 901,000/= 
 
Gross margin with 100% survival would be 
901,000 – 1,488,094     = -587,094 
Gross margin with No. field expenses with 100% survival of chicks  
901,00 – (428,274 + 166,000)   = 306,726/=  
 
252
 
DISCUSSION 
Newcastle disease and parasites control interventions for village chickens in two agro 
ecological zones were selected based on their economic importance in rural poultry 
production in Uganda [1,6]. For ND control LaSota and the I–2 thermostable vaccines were 
used. LaSota vaccine has been in use for chicken vaccination against ND in Uganda. Its 
capacity to protect chicken is well establis hed especially in intensive poultry production 
system. The I-2 thermostable vaccine was being introduced for rural use. A high protection 
level in chicken against ND was attained in terms of HI antibody titres and ability of the 
vaccinated chicken to resist challenge by a local ND virulent virus strain, this is in agreement 
with the findings of other workers [13,14]. However, 100% protection level in village chicken 
was not attained by either of the vaccines inspite of the application method and schedule used. 
The eye drop method for ND vaccine applicatio n on a 3 month interval is recommended to 
produce high immune responses in chicken [13]. Apart from the vaccine type, method of 
application, host and managemental factors are also vital in the development of protective 
immunity to ND in chicken [14]. This being a free-range production system, it is possible that 
host and management factors affected the develo pment of immunity in chicken. It shows the 
need for continuous vaccination to attain maximum protection in free–range chicken. 
Before introduction of parasite  control measures, baseline studies established a wide 
range of helminth parasites. This is expected in a free-range system [8]. Earlier studies 
conducted in village chickens in Uganda also indicated similar findings [9,10]. The use of 
Levamisole
® for parasite control was considered a ppropriate because of its wide spectrum 
activity on helminths. However, Ascaridia, Heterakis, and Capillaria species were still 
recovered after treatment. There was evidence of parasite re-infestation and possible 
resistance (Table VII). This is possible under favourable environmental conditions. This may 
not allow attainment of total parasite control in chicken in a free – range system. 
Feed supplementation for chicken is a necessary managemental practice for free–range 
chicken production, [16]. Its provision for chicks  in this study was justifiable. Poultry 
dynamics data collected in the two zones in the 9 months period showed high chick mortality 
demanding additional intervention to the ND and parasite control. Feed supplementation was 
chosen in order to increase chick growth rate s and reduce straying of chicks far from the 
homesteads. It would reduce chances of predation, one of the major causes of chick mortality, 
and contact with other birds in the event of other disease outbreaks. The option of commercial 
chick mash was taken after consideration of transport costs for local materials needed for feed 
formulation and labour implica tions for the farmers for feeds formulation. Although a 
provision of 10gm of concentrate feed for per chick per day is adequate [14], provision of 
30gm per chick per day was adopted to cater for the different chick age groups in the 
homesteads and for the mother hens. Both the chic k survival and growth rates improved. The 
chicks can thus reach production stage and market weights earlier. Poultry populations, egg 
production and mean household flock sizes as indicators of poultry production increased in 
the households in the zones. Th is was attributed to the hea lth intervention especially ND 
vaccination. In the Mountain zone this trend was maintained during 9 months study period. In 
agro-pastoral zone, there was slight decline after the 6 months. This was attributed to the civil 
unrest which affected the area. Poultry dyna mics data after 6 months showed a sudden 
increase in chicken consumption, sales and exchange for other livestock (Table XIIIc). This 
was probably an effort by the farmers to di spose of their poultry stocks during the civil 
disorder. 
253
 
Financial analyses of the health interventions were cost effective. This can be 
attributed to increased household poultry popul ations and egg productio n and reduction in 
chicken losses. If the farmers adopted the technologies, there would be further reduction on or 
minimal field expenses in the provision of the interventions, which would further increase the 
gross margins. Feed supplementation using commercial chick mash can possibly become cost 
effective when there are minimal chick losses, birds reach market weights and become 
productive. This is a possible achievement which is worth exploring in the free range system 
in future studies. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The I-2 vaccine has the capacity to protect village chicken against Newcastle disease 
leading to improved production under field conditions in Uganda. Total control of poultry 
parasites may not be attained under free range system. Feed supplementation for chicks can 
indirectly contribute to improved survival under free range poultry management system  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge the suppo rt of the Animal Production and Health 
Section of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of the International Atomic Energy Agency Vienna, 
Austria for technical and financial support of the project. 
I would like to thank the Director of the Livestock Health Research Institute (LIRI) for 
his Tororo, Uganda support and cooperation. 
The District Veterinary Officers of Mbale and Soroti districts Uganda are specially 
thanked for their support, cooperation and organisation of the field activities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] DISTRICT VETERINARY REPORTS, UGANDA, 1980–2000. Ministry of Agriculture, 
Animal Industry and Fisheries, Entebbe, Uganda. 
[2] GUYEYE, E.F. The role of family poultry in poverty alleviation, for food security and 
promotion of gender equality in rural Africa. Outlook on Agriculture, 29 (2) 2000, 
129–136. 
[3] KITALYI, A.J, Village chicken production systems in rural Africa. Household food 
security and gender issues. FAO Animal Production & Health paper 142 Rome. Italy 
1998. 5-13. 
[4] YONGOLO, M.G.S. Epidemiology of Newcastle disease in village chickens in Tanzania. 
MVM dissertation. University of Sokoine. United Republic of Tanzania. 1996 234 pp. 
[5] AWAN, M.A Epidemiology of Newcastle disease in rural poultry MSC dissertation. 
University of Reading. 
[6] OJOK, L. Diseases as impor tant factor affecting increased poultry production in Uganda. 
Tropen Landwirt 94. 1993. 33–44. 
[7] COPLAND J.W Newcastle disease in Poultry. A new food pellet vaccine. ACIAR No. 5, 
119p. 
[8] PERMIN, A; JORGEN W. HANSEN. Epidemiology, Diagnosis and control of poultry 
parasites. FAO Animal Health Manual. 4 Rome 1998. 1–46 
[9] BWANGAMOI .O. Poulty helminth parasites of Uganda. Bulletin Epiz. Dis. Afica. 16. 
1968, 429–459 
254
 
[10] SSENYONGA, G.S.Z. Prevalence of helminth parasites of domestic fowl (Gallus 
domesticus) in Uganda. Tropical Animal Health and Production 14. 1982. 201–204. 
[11] NATIONAL LIVESTOCK CENSUS REPORT, UGANDA Vol. IV Livestock 
characteristics., Ministry of Agriculture, Animals Industry and Fisheries, Entebbe, 
1993. 31–40. 
[12] ALLAN, W.H AND GOUGH. R. E. A standard Haemagglutination Inhibition test for 
Newcastle disease. Veterinary Records 95. 1974. 147–149 
[13] WAMBURA, P.N; KAPAGA. A.M. AND HYERA, J.M.K Experimental trials with a 
thermostable Newcastle disease virus (Strain I–2) in commercial and village chickens 
in Tanzania. Preventive Veterinary Medicine (2000) 43: 75–83. 
[14] TU, T.D: PHUC, K.V; DINH. N.T.K. QUOC, D.N. AND SPRADBROW, P.D 
Vietnamies trails with a thermostable Newcastle disease vaccine (Strain I–2) in 
experimental and village chickens. Prev. Vet. Med. (1998) 34: 204–214. 
[15] ALDERS R. AND P. SPRADBROW. In troduction to live thermostable Newcastle 
disease vaccines. In: Controlling Newcastle disease in village chickens. A field 
manual 2001. 37–44 
[16] SANOFI ANIMAL HEALTH. Guide to p oultry management in Tropical Conditions 
1995. 43–58 
[17] POWELL, P.C Immune mechanisms in infections of poultry. Veterinary Immunology 
and Immunopathology 15. 1987. 87–113 
[18] GUNARATNE, S.P; CHANDRASIRI, A.D.N; HEWALATHA, W.A.P.M; ROBERTS, 
J.A. The feed resource base for scavenging village chickens in Sri Lanka .Tropical 
Animal Health and Production 26. 1993, 249–257.  
255
 
EVALUATION OF HEALTH AND PRODUCTIVITY OF FAMILY POULTRY 
IN EASTERN TANZANIA AND THE IMPACT OF CONTROLLING 
NEWCASTLE DISEASE 
H.M. MSAMI
1, P.N. WAMBURA2, U. M. MINGA3 
1Animal Diseases Research Institute, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Dept. of Veterinary Microbiology, Sokoine 
University of Agriculture, Morogoro, Tanzania  
3Open University of Tanzania, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
Abstract 
During the period of February 2003 and April 2004, a study was undertaken to implement 
intervention measures towards constraints limiting family chicken production in Eastern Tanzania. 
The study involved continuing with the control of Newcastle disease through vaccination using heat 
stable I-2 vaccine by eye-drop inoculation in six villages in two zones involving 43 households so as 
to ensure survival of birds in ND outbreaks. Simultaneously, Fowl pox control by vaccination was also 
implemented Improvement of shelter for chicks so as to avoid mortalities arising from diseases, 
predation and nutritional disorders was also attempted. A total of 246 serum samples from local 
chickens flocks in Dar es Salaam, Coast, Arusha and Singida Regions were tested for specific 
antibodies to IBD/ Gumboro Disease by Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) using a 
commercial kit FlockChek from Idexx Europe B.V Serological results revealed a prevalence of 
approximately 2.85% (7/246). The fowl pox vaccine was effective in preventing Fowl Pox outbreaks. 
Realising the health problems posed by Fowl pox following ND control, ADRI initiated a research 
project aiming at developing a local vaccine. Several strains of avian pox virus were isolated from 
local chickens, commercial chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl and pigeons. Candidate vaccinal strains 
have been identified after carry out multiple passages and determination of antigenic properties and 
they are now being tested in a controlled experiment to determine safety and efficacy.  
The study has shown that given the conditions that exist in the villages, use of thermostable I-
2 vaccine administered by the eye-drop method once every four months will protect the local chickens 
against ND infection The I-2 vaccine proved to be reliable (efficacy was computed at 79%). and easy-
to-use for most people. 
The socio-economic data was used to compute partial budget whereby the profit was 
calculated at 81% and household income was 2.5 times returns on investment and hence the 
vaccination intervention was successful 
INTRODUCTION 
In Tanzania good statistics on the poultry population are not available but the total 
number is believed to be in the order of 30,900,000 chicke ns (1994/95 National Sample 
Census of Agriculture Report, volume II).  Within this number are found: 26,400,000 local 
village chickens kept predominantly in the rural areas; commercial birds including broiler and 
layer chickens about 3,200,000. A turnover of 20 million total commercial chickens per year 
is estimated. Around 72% of agricultural households keep chickens. 
Of all livestock kept in Tanzania, local chickens are the most widely evenly 
distributed throughout the country (Boki, 2000). However, a large portion of the national total 
is found in Lake Zone and Southern highlands  and especially in Mbeya, Shinyanga and 
Iringa. In Southern regions particularly Mtwara, the role of family chicken as a commodity is 
higher than anywhere else in the country due to low numbers or total absence of other 
livestock. The major farmyard management system is: — free ranging (scavengers), — with 
small shelter provided for the night. 
256
 
There are several advantages of the traditional poultry husbandry system that includes: 
absence of religious objections for the consumption of poultry, both poultry meat and the eggs 
contain protein of a hi gh biological value, women and child ren are often in charge of the 
farmyard poultry thereby getting an opportunity to  uplift themselves and earning an income. 
The production of poultry is a relatively efficient and fast way to turn raw and waste materials 
into valuable animal protein: poultry has a hi gh feed conversion compared to other livestock, 
no cold chain is needed; the birds can be bought alive, Poultry litter is a very efficient 
fertilizer, farmers are, in principle, more willin g to sell poultry and their products rather than 
the larger livestock. Poultry represent a regular cash flow, whereas ruminants represent more 
of a capital reserve. Other uses of local chickens in Tanzania are: To meet expenses of 
attending a traditional healer. In such cases only black, red or white coloured chickens may be 
used. Some tribes employ parts of the chic ken often mixed with medicinal plants as 
traditional therapy against human diseases particularly in children illnesses, female 
infertilities, abnormally prolonged menstrual periods and simple fractures. Local chickens 
play an important role in social life in v illages during ceremonies, rituals, in traditional 
healing and gifts to respectable guests. 
Large markets for rural chickens are found in  urban centres. In order to exploit urban 
markets, traders have to transport live local birds for long distances using large wicker baskets 
on trucks and on roof-tops of buses from centres of production in central zones (Dodoma and 
Singida) to centres of consumption particularly Dar es Salaam. Singida region is probably the 
only area where local chicken keeping has assumed a serious business outlook. 
Many international organisations, animal  scientists and ve terinarians are now 
becoming interested in the potential productivity  of village chickens. The causes of low 
productivity are being defined and suitable interventions are being designed. Under the 
auspices of International Atomic Energy Agency (I.A.E.A), a research project on family 
poultry was conducted from March 1999 to April 2004, to try and identify the major disease 
conditions and factors limiting family chicken production in Coast and Dar es Salaam regions 
of Tanzania. Newcastle disease was revealed to be the major constraint inhibiting rural 
chicken development followed closely by poor  housing that causes high chick mortality 
through diseases and predation. Therefore subs equent interventions directed towards these 
major limitations of rural chic ken production were planned a nd implemented. The project 
reported here sought to address the issue through well-defined objectives. 
The overall objective of this project in Tanzania was to improve village poultry 
production through the introduction of cost effective and sustainable interventions. 
The work undertaken in the final 18 months of the project aimed at fulfilling the 
following specific objectives: 
To continue with the control of Newcastle disease through vaccination using heat 
stable I-2 vaccine by eye-drop inoculation so as to ensure survival of birds in ND outbreaks. 
To reduce deaths of chicks through impr ovement of Fowl pox control. With the 
control of ND, several other diseases have surfaced demandi ng an attention previously 
unwarranted.  
To reduce death of chicks through improvement of shelter for chicks. The low number 
of growers and chicks noted in the previous survey was mainly due to high chick mortality 
(that reached over 30%) resulting from diseases, predation and nutritional disorders. Housing 
257
 
for the chicks needed to be improved to assi st in disease control and in particular the 
predation. 
To test the frozen sera collected in the previous survey and preserved at ADRI for 
specific antibodies to Infecti ous Bursal Disease (IBD)/ Gumboro Disease by Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technique.  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Selection of study areas  
Study sites were those selected in 1999, for the initial phase of project 
implementation. Two ecological zones in the coast (zone I) and Dar es Salaam region (zone 
II) of Eastern Tanzania were selected for the field study. The weather in the zones is 
characterised by marked seasonality: dry season (June–October, January–March) and rainy 
seasons {March–May (long rains), November–December, (short rains)}. Field visits were 
centred on three villages (Mwendapole, Pangani, Boko) in Kibaha district (in zone I) and 
three others (Toangoma, Mbande and Gezaulole) in  Temeke district (in zone II) as shown in 
table I. With the assistance of Government & Livestock Field Officers responsible for the 
respective villages, 6–11 farmers preferably female who keep family chicken were identified 
from each village. Visits were then made to the respective villa ge for the purpose of 
explaining the objectives of the research proj ect to the village leadership, villagers and 
particularly so to the participants of the project. The latter were notified of specific dates 
when they will be visited for data and sample collections and vaccinations. 
TABLE I . DATA FROM SIX VILLAGES IN TWO ECOLOGICAL ZONES USED FOR THE 
MONITORED NEWCASTLE DISEASE VACCINATION STUDY. 
District Village No. of 
households 
selected 
Flock size 
range 
No. of sera taken Average no. 
birds 
vaccinated 
    A B C  
Kibaha Mwendapole 6 1–34 56 32 42 102 
 Pangani 11 10–102 76 69 55 317 
 Boko 6 10–48 49 37 36 126 
Temeke Toangoma 6 6–38 51 41 40 112 
 Mmbande 7 9–100 69 40 37 211 
 Gezaulole 7 9–88 61 33 75 234 
Total 362 252 285 1102 
A, B and C denotes number of serum samples taken prevaccination, 2 weeks and 15 weeks post vaccination 
respectively. 
Field activities 
During the period of April 2003 and April 2004, the project, activities were carried out 
both in the field and in the laboratory in accordance with standardised protocols agreed during 
the 3rd Research Coordination Meeting (RCM) of the Coordinated Research Programme held 
at Quatre Bornes, Mauritius, 6–10 May 2002 The main field activities were as follows: 
Sensitisation of local communities to the proj ect activities, and notification of poultry 
keepers of the dates of sampling visits by Animal Diseases Research Institute (ADRI) field 
258
 
teams, Examination of chickens for any sign of  disease or parasites, conducting autopsy on 6 
sick or dead birds, Collection of background epidemiological data, Administration of socio-
economic questionnaires on poultry keeping and hus bandry practices, Recording of all field 
information on standard data sheets, Va ccination against ND and Fowl pox, Poultry 
Population dynamics recording, Design of sh elter through PRA techniques, Procurement of 
feeds. The 43 households from the 6 village s were used for ND vaccination as the 
experimental units. The non-vaccinated households in the neighbourhood were considered as 
controls. Initial visits were made to the v illages for sensitisation on the importance of the 
intended interventions. They were notified of the vaccination and sample collection dates. In 
total 16 visits were made. A ll the 1352 chickens identified during the surveys and newly 
hatched chicks belonging to the 43 households were vaccinated through the eye drop route 
using thermo stable vaccine I-2 strain locally produced at ADRI. 3 Vaccinations at intervals 
of 4 months were conducted during the months of February, June and October. These periods 
are now the accepted vaccination calendar in the involved villages. 
The laboratory activities 
Recording all information from field sheets and from laboratory tests in PC databases, 
Sera previously collected in cryo-tubes and preserved at –20°C were employed for testing of 
specific antibodies to ND virus (NDV) and IBDV using the ELISA test to detect antibodies 
against ND Fowl pox 
A commercial vaccine from Shafit Biologic al Laboratories Israel was used for 
controlling the disease. The vaccine was reconstituted by transferring 5 ml of diluent into the 
freeze-dried vaccine before it was applied by dipping the needle in the vaccine suspension and 
stabbing through the underside skin of the wing web or the skin of the thigh. Each bird was 
vaccinated only once, preferably during the first round of I-2 ND vaccination program. 
Therefore in the subsequent rounds of vaccination only the newly hatched birds and those not 
previously vaccinated were covered.  
Infectious bursal disease (IBD) 
A total of 246 serum samples from local chic kens flocks in Dar es Salaam, Coast, 
Arusha and Singida Regions were tested for specific antibodies to IBD/ Gumboro Disease by 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA ) using a commercial kit FlockChek from 
Idexx Europe B.V., Koolhovenlaan 20, 1119 NE  Schiphol-Rijk, The Netherlands (see Table 
I). Sera from locations other the zone I and II study areas were used because those from 
project sites were depleted after being sent to Netherlands. The instructions specified for their 
use by the manufacturer were followed careful ly. The procedure was based on a standard 
indirect ELISA technique to determine the presence of antibody in serum. The substrate used 
was TMB. The conjugate was a commercial (goat) anti-chicken IgG monoclonal antibody 
labelled with horseradish peroxidase. Results of the assay were  read photometrically using a 
standard ELISA reader (Titertek Multiskan Plus, Finland) at an absorbency wavelength of 
620 nm. The latter was used after failing to secure the 650 nm filter that was recommended by 
the manufacturers. 
Negative control mean (NCx) and positive control mean (PCx) were calculated and 
employed for determining the relative level of antibody in the samples to positive serum (S/P) 
ratio. End point titres were calculated using the formula: log
10 Titer = 1.09(log 10S/P) + 3.36. 
Serum samples with titers greater than 396 were considered positive and indicated exposure 
259
 
to IBDV. Negative score was given to all samples with the reaction of less than 0.2 S/P ratio 
and there were to 214 (87%) of them. 
Housing 
Appropriate housing using local ly available materials were designed. The farmers 
were taught about the optimal shelter, which would prevent disease spread and predation. 
Using them entailed provision of feeds and water, which for the second time proved very 
difficult. Instead, the farmers were advised to  adopt the weaver basket in which only the 
chicks were kept during feeding. Supplementa ry feeding was advocated using layers mash 
feeds to augment availability of energy and protein. The supplementary feeds were not meant 
to meet all nutritional needs but only about one third of total needs per chicken, except for 
brooding hens and the chicks. Chicks were to be fed on chick mash and the hens; layers mash 
and these were supposed to be supplied 
ad libitum during the first one-month following 
hatching.  
Partial Budgeting 
Population dynamics of the fl ocks and the average price for adults and/or growers 
along with the cost of the interventions were determined. This was used as a basic database 
for the partial budget determinations for verifying whether the interventions were 
economically feasible.  
RESULTS  
Fowl pox vaccination  
The fowl pox vaccine was effective in preventing Fowl Pox outbreaks. A small 
nodular swelling appearing seven days after vaccination, indi cated successful immunization. 
The major problems encountered were those relate d to cold chain provision and the fact that 
the vaccine is dispensed in large quantities not suited to the needs of individual families or 
villages. 
Realising the health problems posed by  Fowl pox following ND control, ADRI 
initiated a research project aiming at developing a lo cal vaccine. Several strains of avian pox 
virus were isolated from local  chickens, commercia l chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl and 
pigeons. Candidate vaccinal strains have been identified after carry out multiple passages and 
determination of antigenic properties and they are now being tested in a controlled experiment 
to determine safety and efficacy. Future plans are to determine their genetic properties using 
molecular biological techniques. 
IBD serological testing 
Serological results for 246 samples analysed  for IBD are summarized in Table II and 
revealed a prevalence of approximately 2.85% (7/246).  
 
 
260
 
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF SEROLOGICAL SCREENING OF TANZANIAN 
LOCAL CHICKENS FOR IBD USING INDIRECT ELISA TECHNIQUE. 
Location N tested Positive/total (%) Negative/total (%) 
Coast (Mafia) 128 6/128 (4.7) 122/128 (95.3) 
Arusha (Arumeru) 93 1/93 (1.1) 92/93 (99.9) 
Singida 4 0/4 (0) 4/4 (100) 
Dar es salaam (Mmbande) 8 0/8 (0) 8/8 (100) 
Dar es salaam (Tuangoma) 13 0/13 (0) 13/13 (100) 
Total 246 0/246 (2.85) 0/246 (87) 
Housing 
The feeds were too expensive for the resource poor farmers and when provided were 
of inappropriate quality and therefore chicks di ed of deficiency syndromes. This intervention 
proved very difficult to implement. 
Partial Budgeting 
Income minus costs (profit) was calculated at Tshs. 2,094,000.00 (US $ 2326) income 
divided by costs (return) was 2.5 (Annex I). Gi ven that the mathematical expression of both 
the profit and the return was greater than one, the vaccination intervention could be 
considered to have been successful 
TABLE III . POPULATION DYNAMICS OF THE FLOCKS IN THE INVESTIGATED 
HOUSEHOLDS BELONGING TO SIX VILLAGES AND NUMBERS OF CHICKEN’S 
SOLD/GIVEN AS GIFTS, DIED/LOST OR CONSUMED IN THE PERIOD NOVEMBER TO 
FEBRUARY. 
Village Flock Size No. of chickens 
Sold/Given as Gifts 
No. of chickens 
Slaughtered 
No. of chickens 
Dead Lost 
Mwendapole 264 25 31 124 
Pangani 261 37 71 113 
Boko Timiza 451 50 22 93 
Tuangoma 66 5 4 28 
Mmbande 134 29 13 164 
Gezaulole 81 0 0 0 
Total 1257 146 141 522 
TABLE IV . FLOCK SIZE AND STRUCTURE IN THE 43 FARMERS INTERVIEWED IN THE 
TWO ZONES DURING 2001. THE NUMBER IN THE PARENTHESIS DENOTES THE TOTAL 
NUMBERS ESTABLISHED IN THE BASELINE SURVEY IN 1999.  
 Flock Size and structure 
 Total Cocks Hens Growers Chicks 
February 1257 129 282 356 490 
June 1295 121 296 325 553 
October 1218 99 294 279 536 
Average (1099) 
1256.7 
(91) 116.3 (355) 
290.7 
(327) 320.0 (326) 526.3 
261
 
TABLE V. DATA COLLECTED FROM 43 HOUSEHOLDS FOR CALCULATION OF INCOME 
GENERATED FROM THE NEWCASTLE VACCINATION PROGRAMME. (FEBRUARY 2001) 
  Total Cocks Hens Growers Chicks 
Flock Size and 
structure 
1257 
1295a 1218b 
129 
121a 99b 
282 
296a 294b 
356 
325a 279b 
490 
553a 536b 
Sold/Given as 
Gifts 
146 
274
a 94b 
82 
160a 49b 
45 
80a 44b 
15 
11a 1b 
4 
23a 0b 
Dead/Lost birds 522 
113a 35b 
170 
43a 48b 
34 
68a 44b 
67 
244a 399b 
251 
63a 28b 
Slaughtered 141 
73a 41b 
102 
71a 41b 
30 
2a 0b 
9 
0a 0 b 
0 
0a 0b 
Key a and b denotes the corresponding Figures for the quarters ending in June and October 
respectively 
Annex I  
Partial Budgeting Form 
Name of Country: Tanzania  Date: 2001/2002 
INCREASED INCOME  INCREASED COSTS  
Additional Income 
generated from the 
programme 
 Costs as a result of the programme Tshs. 
Adult and growers sold 
after the programme was 
started x price/unit  
 
 
 
MINUS 
2307 x 2000  
 
 
Tshs. 4,614,000 
(US $ 5126) 
Training Extension Officers  
Training Manuals 
Backstopping visits 
Implementation of vaccination and 
distribution and supply of vaccine 
Cost of Newcastle disease vaccine 
Fuel (Transport) 
Allowances for FOs and  
VEOs during campaigns 
200,000 
20,000 
200,000 
 
 
 
 
20,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Adult and growers sold 
before the programme was 
started x price/unit 
840 x 2000 
Tshs. 1,680,000 
($ 1867) 
Total Costs Tshs. 
840,000 
($ 933) 
Difference in Income Tshs. 2,934,000  ($ 2326) 
Income minus Costs (profit)                    2,094,000 Tshs 
Income divided by Costs (return)               2.5  
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Besides ND, the other disease documented to limit local chicken productivity included 
fowl pox, coryza infections, fowl typhoid, In fectious Bursal Dis ease/Gumboro Disease and 
parasitic diseases (helminthosis, external parasitism, protozoan diseases). Diseases are the 
number one causes of chicken losses in form of  deaths or mortality. The importance of 
detecting and controlling the diseases cannot be overemphasized. Fowl pox may occur in 
cutaneous form when it produces dramatic and prominent nodular lesions on the combs, 
wattles, but especially around the eyes on the eyelids, nostril and in the oral cavity. Although 
mortality is low, the disease causes indirect losses in terms of loss of weight. The diphtheritic 
form of fowl pox causes lesions in the GIT and respiratory tracts causing difficulties in 
262
 
feeding and breathing and then death. Fowl pox is prevalent among village chickens in 
Tanzania and hence control by vaccination was important. Unreported observations seem to 
indicate seasonal occurrence of fowl pox among village chickens especially around the rainy 
season. Fowl pox particularly proved a nuisa nce following ND control. The fact that pox 
lesions were manifested on the head – around the eyes, led to some farmers to connect the I-2 
instilled by eye-drop method with this dreadful di sease. It was therefore important to deal 
with this condition so as to strengthen the farmer’s confidence in the use of I-2 vaccine. 
Occurrence of clinical syndromes of infectious bursal disease (IBD) of chickens in 
Tanzania was first observed in 1989. The diseas e was encountered in layer chicks purchased 
from one commercial hatchery in Dar es Salaam (Kapaga 
et al., 1989). Since this eruption, 
IBD in Tanzania has been occurring almost annually; the disease now being the main killer of 
intensively managed commercial layers in the major cities especially Dar es Salaam and 
Arusha. The disease syndrome has also been obs erved in scavenging chickens in some parts 
of rural Tanzania (Yongolo et al 1995). 
Diagnosis of IBD in Tanzania has been ba sed predominantly on pathological lesions 
seen at autopsy. Laboratory diagnostic procedur es e.g. virus isolation and characterization as 
well as serological tests have not been established fully at any of the diagnostic laboratories in 
Tanzania, mainly due to lack of resources. Th e epidemiological patterns of IBD in Tanzania 
have for similar reasons not been precisely explored.  
The study has shown that given the conditions that exist in the villages, use of 
thermostable I-2 vaccine administered by th e eye-drop method once every three months will 
protect the local chickens against ND infection (2 weeks after vaccination, 91.3% of chickens 
had sero-converted with peak mean titre of greater than log 2 7 and the mean peak titres 
remained at least log2 3 for 15 weeks after vaccination). The I-2 vaccine proved to be reliable 
(efficacy was computed at 79%). and easy-to-use for most people. 
A standardised ELISA technique for both Newcastle disease and Gumboro disease has 
been established at the ADRI, which enhances the institute’s Laboratory diagnostic capability. 
The socio-economic data was used to comput e partial budget whereby the profit was 
calculated at 81% and household income was 5.3 times returns on investment. 
When titration of NDV antibodies using an ELISA test was done in 80 of the HI tested 
sera, the results showed that the relative sens itivity of ELISA to HI was 83.78; the relative 
specificity was 0/6; the Predictive value of a positive result was 91.17. If the cut-off value was 
changed from 30% (recommended by IAEA) to 15% then the relative sensitivity and the 
predictive value for a positive result for ELISA compared to HI could be improved to 95.94 
and 92.2 respectively. 
The prevalence study showed that about  2.85%of avian serum samples from local 
chickens examined by ELISA technique had positive results for IBDV. 
Other related activities performed during this reporting period 
Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project (SANDCP)  
The Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project (SANDCP) is a three-year 
project financed by the Australian Agency fo r International Developme nt that is supporting 
263
 
the control of ND in Mozambique, Tanzania and Malawi. The project started its activities in 
Tanzania in 2003. 
The main purpose of SANDCP is to assist  the Governments of Mozambique, Malawi 
and Tanzania to develop and implement efficient and equita ble ND control programmes to 
improve smallholder, community  and national welfare.The SA NDCP aims to promote the 
vaccination of village chickens against ND usin g I-2 vaccine The project will work towards: 
Strengthening the capability of, and relationship between, stakeholders in order to 
successfully implement Newcastle disease (ND) control programmes, Achieving a decrease in 
chicken mortality rates caused by ND in project activity areas. 
Technology Implementation Plan 
The exploitable outputs of the project are: novel technique for controlling ND using I-
2 vaccination has been achieved. Use of ELISAs for the detection of NDV and IBDV antigens 
has been established. 
Several factors inhibiting rural chicken development were identified and possible 
solutions determined and tested. 
Partial budget determinations were utilised  to determine the economic feasibility of 
ND vaccination and high rates of return obtained. 
These outputs have been, and shall continue to be disseminated in the following ways: 
presentations at national and international scientific meetings and conferences, publications in 
international peer-reviewed scientific journals, direct liaison during and after the project with 
national and regional ND control programme s operating in Tanzania, for example the 
SANDCP & Family poultry action Group (FAPIAG). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful for financial support from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
through the FAO/IAEA Coordinated Res earch Programme On “Assessment of the 
Effectiveness of Vaccination Strategies ag ainst Newcastle Diseas e and Gumboro Disease 
Using Immunoassay-based Technologies for Incr easing Farmyard Poultry Production in 
Africa”. Research Contract No.: 10191/RO. The Director ADRI is acknowledged for 
provision of manpower, laboratory facilities and vehicle for project activities. 
REFERENCES 
Allan, N.H. and Gough, R.E., 1974. A standard haemagglutination inhibition test for 
Newcastle disease: 1. A compa rison of macro- and micro- methods. Vet. Rec. 95, pp. 
120¯123. 
Minga U.M., Katule A., Yongolo M. and Mwanjala T., (1996) The Rural Chicken Industry in 
Tanzania: Does it make Economic sense? .Tanzania Veterinary Journal Vol 16 
Supplementary2, pp 25–32 
Msami H.M. (2000) Studies on th e Structure and Problems of Family Poultry Production in 
Tanzania with Suggestions on Improvements and Interventions. Paper presented at the 
2nd Research Coordination Meeting of th e Co-coordinated Research Programme on 
"Improvement of Health and Management of Family Poultry Production in Africa" 
from 4 to 8 September, 2000 in Morogoro Tanzania. 
264
 
Spradbrow, P.B. 1999. Thermostable Newcastle Disease vaccine for use in village chickens. 
First INFPD/FAO Electronic Conference on Family Poultry. Free communication 10. 
Spradbrow, P.B., 1993. Newcastle disease in village chickens. Poultry Sci. Rev. 5, pp. 57¯96. 
Yongolo et al (1995). Infectious Bursal Disease and Dispharynx nasuta in village chickens. 
Tanzania Veterinary Association Conference Proceedings. Vol 16: 191–196 
Wambura P. N., Kapaga A. M. and Hyera J.  M. K. 2000 Experimental trials with a 
thermostable Newcastle disease virus (strain I2) in commercial and village chickens in 
Tanzania Prev. Vet. Med. 43, pp. 75–83. 
 
265
 
SUMMARY OF FIVE YEARS OF IAEA FUNDED PROJECT ON 
IMPROVEMENT OF FAMILY POULTRY PRODUCTION IN AFRICA: 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS* 
H.M. MSAMI
1, P.N. WAMBURA2 AND U. M. MINGA3 
 1Animal Diseases research Institute, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Dept. of Veterinary Microbiology, Sokoine 
University of Agriculture, Morogoro, Tanzania  
3Open University of Tanzania, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
Abstract 
During the period of February 1999 and April 2004, a study was undertaken to elucidate the 
major disease conditions and factors limiting family chicken production in Tanzania. It covered six 
villages in two zones involving 43 households from which socio-economic data was gathered by use 
of a structured questionnaire in the wet and dry seasons. During field visits, the birds were clinically 
examined, various samples collected, sick and dead ones autopsied. There was significant variation in 
the flock size and structure in the interviewed households. The households kept a total of 1099 and 
1352 chickens with an average of 25.5 and 31.4 per household in the wet and dry seasons respectively. 
The ratio of chick/growers/ adults was 10:10:14 and 11:10:10 in wet and dry seasons respectively. The 
cocks/hen ratio was 1:3.5. Whereas the average number of clutches per year was 3, the number of eggs 
per clutch was 12 and therefore the number of eggs was 36 per hen/year. Average hatchability for the 
two seasons was recorded as 84%. Chick mortality was found to be 30% and resulted mainly from 
diseases and predation. Only few households did not provide housing at all while majority provided 
shelters of varying quality. In all the households, scavenging was the system of feeding and sometimes 
supplemented by household food scraps and local feeds. Several diseases and in particular Newcastle 
disease (ND) was shown to be the major constraint inhibiting rural chicken development. Women 
played a major role in family poultry production through provision of labour but men made several 
decisions on the use of the resources. Blood smears were prepared for protozoological examination: 
349 (wet season), 278 (dry season). 
Only 11 of the 349 (3.1%) birds in the wet season were infected with Leucocytozoon simondi 
and Haemoproteus columbae (prevalence 2.8% and 0.3%, respectively). No parasites were seen in the 
samples collected during the dry season. Fresh faecal samples (209) in the wet season and dry season 
were collected and examined for egg worm count using the McMaster technique. The cross sectional 
prevalence study showed that about 77% of faecal samples examined had positive results for 
helminths. Eight different species of helminths eggs were identified. During the dry season, serum 
samples were collected from a total of 362 ND unvaccinated birds and analysed by haemagglutination 
inhibition (HI) test for ND virus antibodies. The results indicated that only 56 (15.5%) birds had 
positive HI titres at a serum dilution of 1:8 and above while 306 (85.5%) birds were negative. A 
serologically monitored ND vaccination exercise using thermostable vaccine strain I-2 was 
undertaken. The results of HI and ELISA tests indicated that vaccinations had been very effective. 
Population dynamics of the flocks were determined on a monthly basis along with the cost of the 
interventions. This was used as a basic database for the partial budget determination. Profit was 
calculated at 81% and the return of investment was 2.5 and hence the vaccination intervention was 
successful. 
INTRODUCTION 
In Tanzania, good statistics on the Poultry population are not available but the total 
number is believed to be on the order of 30,900,000 chickens ( 1994/95 National Sample 
Census of Agriculture report volume II). Within this number are found the following: 
26,400,000 are the local village chickens kept predominantly in the rural areas. Commercial 
birds include broiler and layer chickens estimat ed to be about 3,200,000 at any one time or a 
266
 
turnover of 20 million total commercial chickens per year. There are 1,200,000 ducks and 
geese, 90,000 turkeys and 40,000 guinea fowls. Other types of poultry kept include pigeons. It 
is estimated that out of 3,700,000 total agricu ltural households, the majority (72%) reaching 
2,500,000 households keep chickens compared to 1.10 million, 1.30 million and 520,000 that 
keep cattle, goats and sheep respectively. 
The population of rural chicken fluctuates widely from season to season mainly due to 
the periodic occurrence of Newcastle disease. Other losses result from predators and 
management factors (such as nut rition/feeding, housing etc.). Of all the livestock kept in 
Tanzania, local chickens are the most widely evenly distributed throughout the country (Boki, 
2000). However, a large portion of the national total is found in Lake  Zone and Southern 
highlands and especially in Mbeya, Shinyanga and Iringa. In Southern regions particularly 
Mtwara, the role of family chicken as a com modity is higher than anywhere else in the 
country due to low numbers or total absenc e of other livestock. The major farmyard 
management system is free ranging (scavengers) with a small shelter. There are several 
advantages of the traditional poultry husbandry sy stem that includes: absence of religious 
objections for the consumption of poultry, both poultry meat and the eggs contain protein of a 
high biological value, women and children are often in charge of the farmyard poultry thereby 
getting an opportunity to uplift themselves and earning an income. The production of poultry 
is a relatively efficient and fast way to turn raw and waste materials into valuable animal 
protein: poultry has a high feed conversion co mpared to other livestock, no cold chain is 
needed; the birds can be bought alive, Poultry litter is a very efficient fertilizer, farmers are, in 
principle, more willing to sell poultry and their products rather than the larger livestock. 
Poultry represent a regular cash flow, whereas ruminants represent more of a capital reserve. 
Other uses of local chickens in Tanzania are:  To meet expenses of attending a traditional 
healer. In such cases only black, red or white coloured chickens may be used. Some tribes 
employ parts of the chicken of ten mixed with medicinal plants as traditional therapy against 
human diseases particularly children illnesses, female infertilities, abnormally prolonged 
menstrual periods; and simple fractures. Local chickens play an important role in social life in 
villages during ceremonies, rituals, in traditional healing and gifts to respectable guests 
Large markets for rural chickens are found in  urban centres. In order to exploit urban 
markets, traders have to transport live local birds for long distances using large wicker baskets 
on trucks and on roof-tops of buses from centres of production in central zones (Dodoma and 
Singida) to centres of consumption particularly Dar es Salaam. Singida region is probably the 
only area where local chicken keeping has assumed a serious business outlook. 
The rural chicken supplies about 13–20% of th e urban requirement for meat and eggs 
and 100% of the rural demand (Minga et al  1996, Boki, 2000). Per capital consumption of 
chicken products in Tanzania is very low at 1.07 Kg (c.f. 6.8) of meat and 9.4 (c.f. 108) eggs. 
It is generally accepted that the taste of villa ge chicken is superior to the commercial broiler 
and layers and therefore the former fetches a higher market price than the exotics. Large 
markets for rural chickens are found in urban ce ntres. In order to exploit urban markets, 
traders have to transport live local birds for long distances using large wicker baskets on 
trucks and on roof-tops of buses from centres  of production in central zones (Dodoma and 
Singida) to centres of consumption particularly Dar es Salaam. Singida region is probably the 
only area where local chicken keeping has assumed a serious business outlook. 
Many international organisations, animal  scientists and ve terinarians are now 
becoming interested in the potential productivity  of village chickens. The causes of low 
productivity are being defined and suitable interventions are being designed. Under the 
267
 
auspices of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a research project on family poultry 
was conducted from March 1999 to April 2004, to try and identify the major disease 
conditions and factors limiting family chicken production in Coast and Dar es Salaam regions 
of Tanzania. Newcastle disease was revealed to be the major constraint inhibiting rural 
chicken development followed closely by poor  housing that causes high chick mortality 
through diseases and predation. Therefore subs equent interventions directed towards these 
major limitations of rural chic ken production were planned a nd implemented. The project 
reported here sought to address the issue through specific scientific objectives.  
The main objective of the project was to increase poultry production, both the meat 
and egg production, and to decrease medication costs of the small holder poultry farmer by 
controlling the most important contagious diseases through the development of sound locally 
applicable vaccination strategies using nuclear related techniques. The overall objective of 
this project in Tanzania was to improve village poultry production through the introduction of 
cost effective and sustainable interventions. 
The specific objectives included: to identify the major disease conditions and factors 
limiting family chicken production in Tanzania, to control Newcastle disease through 
vaccination using heat stable I-2 vaccine by eye-drop inoculation, to reduce deaths of chicks 
through improvement of shelter, to a ssess the economic impact of the undertaken 
interventions. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Selection of study areas  
Study sites were selected in two regions of Tanzania: Two ecological zones in the 
coast (zone I) and Dar es Salaam region (zone II) of Eastern Tanzania were selected for the 
field study. The weather in the zones is characterised by marked seasonality: dry season 
(June–October, January–March) and rainy s easons {March–May (long rains), November–
December, (short rains)}. Fiel d visits were centred on three villages (Mwendapole, Pangani, 
Boko) in Kibaha district  (in zone I) and three others (T oangoma, Mbande and Gezaulole) in 
Temeke district (in zone  II). With the assistance of Gove rnment & Livestock Field Officers 
responsible for the respective villages, 6–11 fa rmers preferably female who keep family 
chicken were identified from each village. Visits were then made to the respective village for 
the purpose of explaining the objectives of the research project to the village leadership, 
villagers and particularly so to the participants of the project. The latter were notified of 
specific dates when they will be visited for data and sample collections during the wet and dry 
seasons. 
The Field Study Areas were selected and ba seline data and samples were collected 
during wet and dry seasons of 1999/2000. The da taset included farmer interviews in the 
selected villages by use of structured ques tionnaire to gather information on productivity 
parameters, husbandry practices, flock ownership pattern and labour profiles. The results were 
presented in detail at the 2
nd RCM meeting in Morogoro Tanzania (Msami, 2000) 
Field activities 
The field activities were: sensitisation of local communities to the project activities, 
and notification of poultry keepers of the date s of sampling visits by Animal Diseases 
Research Institute (ADRI) field teams; examination of chickens for any sign of disease or 
268
 
parasites; thorough autopsy on 27 sick or dead birds; collection of background 
epidemiological data; preparation of thick and thin blood smears; blood collection from adult 
and growing birds by puncture of the wi ng vein; administration of socio-economic 
questionnaires on poultry keeping and husbandry pr actices; recording of all field information 
on standard data sheets; vaccination against ND and Fowl pox; poultry population dynamics 
recording; design of shelter through PRA tec hniques; procurement of feeds; collection of 
fresh faecal samples.  
Laboratory activities 
These included: recording all information from field sheets and from laboratory tests 
in PC databases, thic k and thin blood smears stained and examined protozoologically for 
haemoparasites: 349 (wet season), 278 (dry season), after coagulation, sera were harvested, in 
cryotubes and preserved at –20 °C until used for testing of specific antibodies to ND virus 
(NDV) using the haemaglutination inhibition (HI)  test and ELISA test to detect antibodies 
against ND and IBD, statistical analysis of project data, faecal samples examined for egg 
worm count through McMaster technique (209 samples in the wet season and 211 samples in 
the dry season) 
RESULTS  
There was significant variation in the flock size and structure in the interviewed 
households. The 43 households kept 1099 and 1352 chickens with an average of 25.5 and 
31.4 per household in the wet and dry seasons resp ectively. The ratio of chick/growers/adults 
was 10:10:14 and 11:10:10 in wet and dry seas ons respectively. The cocks/hen ratio was 
1:3.5. Average numbers of clutches per year ranged from 2.80–3.02 (average 2.94) in the wet 
season and 3.0–3.36 (average 3.16) in the dry season. Average number of eggs per clutch was 
12 and therefore the number of eggs was 36 per hen/year. Average hatchability for the two 
seasons was recorded as 84%. Chick mortality was found to be 30% and resulted mainly from 
diseases and predation. Out of 43 households interviewed 23 kept their chickens in the 
chicken house, 12 within the family house, 4 in the kitchen/store, 3 kept their birds perched in 
trees and 1 in woven basket. The corresponding figures for the dry season were 22, 12, 3, and 
2. In all the households, scavenging was the system of feeding and sometimes supplemented 
by household food scraps and other local feeds e.g. maize bran. Several diseases and in 
particular Newcastle disease was mentioned by farmers in both zones as the major constraint 
inhibiting rural chicken development. Other dise ases included coughing/sneezing, fowl pox 
and parasitic diseases (helminths, external parasitism, protozoa). Women played a major role 
in family poultry development through provision of labour but men made decisions on the use 
of the resources. 
Blood smears were prepared for protozoolog ical examination: 349 (wet season), 278 
(dry season). Only 11 of the 349 (3.1%) birds in the wet season were infected with 
Leucocytozoon simondi and Haemoproteus columbae (prevalence 2.8% and 0.3%, 
respectively). A large number of fresh faecal samples (209) were collected during the wet and 
the dry season from poultry in the 43 homesteads. They were examined for egg per gram 
(EPG) faeces by the McMaster technique. The cross sectional prevalence study showed that 
77% of 209 faecal samples examined had positiv e results for helminths. Eight different 
species of helminths eggs were identified. 
The details of these findings were presented at the 2
nd Research Coordination Meeting 
of the Coordinated Research Project that was held at Morogoro, Tanzania, from 4 to 8 
269
 
September, 2000 (Msami, 2000). These were disc ussed in detail and on the basis of the 
discussions; the work programme for the following year of the project, 2001–2 was 
formulated. 
Work done 2001–2 
From the previous survey results, several ma nagement factors, and diseases and in 
particular, Newcastle disease were established in both zones as the major constraint affecting 
rural chicken development. (Msami 2000). It fo llowed therefore that in order to improve 
family poultry production in Tanzania the contro l of Newcastle disease through vaccination 
using heat stable I-2 vaccine by eye-drop i noculation should be undertaken. In addition, 
housing needed to be improved to assist in disease control and in particular combat predation, 
which had been identified as the major cause of chick mortality. 
Field visits continued in the three villages (Mwendapole, Pangani, Boko) in Kibaha 
district in zone I and three ot hers (Toangoma, Mbande and Gezaul ole) in Temeke district in 
zone II. 
During the dry season, serum samples were collected from a total of 362 unvaccinated 
birds and analysed by haemagglutination inhi bition (HI) test for ND virus antibodies. The 
results indicated that only 56 (15.5%) birds had protective HI titres at a serum dilution of 1:8 
(log2 3) and above while 306 (85.5%) birds were not protected. A serologically monitored ND 
vaccination exercise using thermostable vaccine strain I-2 locally produced at ADRI was 
undertaken. Following this, serum samples were collected in two phases: 252 two weeks post 
vaccination and 285 fifteen weeks post vaccination and similarly analysed. The results 
indicated that vaccinations had been very effective. Vaccinated flocks showed peak mean 
titres of greater than log2 7 two weeks after vaccination; the mean peak titres remained at least 
log2 3 for 15 weeks after vaccination. No ND outbreak was experienced in the vaccinated 
flocks during the observation period. The high titres found in some chickens before 
vaccination most likely resulted from natural outbreaks of ND. Titration of antibodies using 
an ELISA test was also done in 80 of the HI tested sera. The relative sensitivity of ELISA to 
HI was 83.8; and the predictive value of a positive result was 91.2. 
PRA was undertaken for the purpose of designing appropriate housing, specifically for 
chicks, using locally available materials and use of wicker basket popularly known as “tenga” 
was adopted. The vaccinated chickens on eight farms were to be used as a control group. The 
other 35 farms were to be used for a housing intervention. Once the birds were housed, they 
needed to be fed and provided with water and initially the farmers agreed to the idea of 
providing the feeds. However, procurement of  feeds for the housed birds proved difficult, 
farmers let their birds free, and assessment of this intervention could not be done. 
Population dynamics of the fl ocks and the average price for adults and/or growers 
along with the cost of the interventions were determined. This was used as a basic database 
for the partial budget determinations for verifying whether the interventions were 
economically feasible. Income minus costs (pro fit) was calculated at Tshs. 2,094,000.00 (US 
$ 2326) income divided by costs (return) was 2.5 (Annex I). Given that the mathematical 
expression of both the profit and the return was greater than one, the vaccination intervention 
could be considered to have been successful 
The details of these findings were presented at the 3
rd Research Coordination Meeting 
of the Coordinated Research Project that was conducted at Quatre Bornes, Mauritius, 6–10 
270
 
May 2002. (Msami 2002). These were discussed in detail and on the basis of the discussions; 
the work programme for the final year of the project, 2003–4 was formulated 
Work done 2003–4 
The work undertaken in the final 18 months of the project aimed at fulfilling the 
following specific objectives: 
• To continue with the control of Newcastle disease through vaccination using 
heat stable I-2 vaccine by eye-drop inoculati on so as to ensure survival of birds in 
ND outbreaks. 
• To reduce deaths of chicks through impr ovement of Fowl pox control. With the 
control of ND, several ot her diseases have surface d demanding an attention 
previously unwarranted.  
• To reduce deaths of chicks through impr ovement of shelter for chicks. The low 
number of growers and chicks noted in the previous survey was mainly due to high 
chick mortality (that reached over 30%) resulting from diseases, predation and 
nutritional disorders. Housing for the chicks  needed to be improved to assist in 
disease control and in particular the predation. 
• To test the frozen sera collected in the previous survey and preserved at ADRI 
for specific antibodies to In fectious Bursal Disease (IBD)/ G umboro Disease by 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technique.  
 
Field visits continued in the three villages (Mwendapole, Pangani, Boko from Kibaha 
in zone I and three others (Toangoma, Mmband e and Gezaulole) from Temeke District in 
Zone II selected earlier in the survey work. Use of the already engaged Government and 
Livestock Field Officers responsible for the respective 6 villages was made. 
The 43 households from the 6 villages were used for ND vaccination as the 
experimental units. The non-vaccinated households in the neighbourhood were considered as 
controls. Initial visits were made to the v illages for sensitisation on the importance of the 
intended interventions. They were notified of the vaccination and sample collection dates. In 
total 16 visits were made. A ll the 1352 chickens identified during the surveys and newly 
hatched chicks belonging to the 43 households were vaccinated through the eye drop route 
using thermo stable vaccine I-2 strain locally produced at ADRI. 3 Vaccinations at intervals 
of 4 months were conducted during the months of February, June and October. These periods 
are now the accepted vaccination calendar in the involved villages. 
Fowl pox 
Besides ND, the other disease documented to limit local chicken productivity included 
fowl pox, infections coryza, fowl typhoid, In fectious Bursal Dis ease/Gumboro Disease and 
parasitic diseases (helminthosis, external parasitism, protozoan diseases). Diseases are the 
number one causes of chicken losses in form of  deaths or mortality. The importance of 
detecting and controlling the diseases cannot be overemphasized. Fowl pox may occur in 
cutaneous form when it produces dramatic and prominent nodular lesions on the combs, 
wattles, but especially around the eyes on the eyelids, nostril and in the oral cavity. Although 
mortality is low, the disease causes indirect losses in terms of loss of weight. The diphtheritic 
form of fowl pox causes lesions in the GIT and respiratory tracts causing difficulties in 
feeding and breathing and then death. Fowl pox is prevalent among village chickens in 
271
 
Tanzania and hence control by vaccination was important. Unreported observations seem to 
indicate seasonal occurrence of fowl pox among village chickens especially around the rainy 
season. Fowl pox particularly proved a nuisa nce following ND control. The fact that pox 
lesions were manifested on the head, around the ey es, led to some farmers to connect the I-2 
instilled by eye-drop method with this dreadful di sease. It was therefore important to deal 
with this condition so as to strengthen the farmer’s confidence in the use of I-2 vaccine. A 
commercial vaccine from Shafit Biological Labora tories Israel was used for controlling the 
disease. The vaccine was reconstituted by transferring 5 ml of diluent into the freeze-dried 
vaccine before it was applied by dipping the needle in the vaccine suspension and stabbing 
through the underside skin of the wing web or the skin of the thigh. Each bird was vaccinated 
only once, preferably during the first round of I-2 ND vaccination programme. Therefore in 
the subsequent rounds of vaccination only the newly hatched birds and those not previously 
vaccinated were covered.  
Housing 
Appropriate housing using local ly available materials were designed. The farmers 
were taught about the optimal shelter, which would prevent disease spread and predation. 
Using them entailed provision of feeds and water, which for the second time proved very 
difficult. Instead, the farmers were advised to  adopt the weaver basket in which only the 
chicks were kept during feeding. Supplementa ry feeding was advocated using layers mash 
feeds to augment availability of energy and protein. The supplementary feeds were not meant 
to meet all nutritional needs but only about one third of total needs per chicken, except for 
brooding hens and the chicks. Chicks were to be fed on chick mash and the hens; layers mash 
and these were supposed to be supplied 
ad libitum during the first one-month following 
hatching. The feeds were too expensive for the resource poor farmers and when provided 
were of inappropriate quality and therefore ch icks died of deficiency syndromes. This 
intervention proved very difficult to implement. 
Infectious bursal disease (IBD) 
Occurrence of clinical syndromes of infectious bursal disease (IBD) of chickens in 
Tanzania was first observed in 1989. The diseas e was encountered in layer chicks purchased 
from one commercial hatchery in Dar es Salaam (Kapaga et al., 1989). Since this eruption, 
IBD in Tanzania has been occurring almost annually; the disease now being the main killer of 
intensively managed commercial layers in the major cities especially Dar es Salaam and 
Arusha. The disease syndrome has also been obs erved in scavenging chickens in some parts 
of rural Tanzania (Yongolo et al 1995). 
Diagnosis of IBD in Tanzania has been ba sed predominantly on pathological lesions 
seen at autopsy. Laboratory diagnostic procedur es e.g. virus isolation and characterization as 
well as serological tests have not been established fully at any of the diagnostic laboratories in 
Tanzania, mainly due to lack of resources. Th e epidemiological patterns of IBD in Tanzania 
have for similar reasons not been precisely explored.  
A total of 246 serum samples from local chic kens flocks in Dar es Salaam, Coast, 
Arusha and Singida Regions were tested for specific antibodies to IBD/ Gumboro Disease by 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA ) using a commercial kit FlockChek from 
Idexx Europe B.V., Koolhovenlaan 20, 1119 NE  Schiphol-Rijk, The Netherlands (see Table 
I). Sera from locations other the zone I and II study areas were used because those from 
project sites were depleted after being sent to Netherlands. The instructions specified for their 
use by the manufacturer were followed careful ly. The procedure was based on a standard 
272
 
indirect ELISA technique to determine the presence of antibody in serum. The substrate used 
was TMB. The conjugate was a commercial (goat) anti-chicken IgG monoclonal antibody 
labelled with horseradish peroxidase. Results of the assay were  read photometrically using a 
standard ELISA reader (Titertek Multiskan Plus Finland) at an absorbency wavelength of 620 
nm. The latter was used after failing to secure the 650 nm filter that was recommended by the 
manufacturers. 
Negative control mean (NCx) and positive control mean (PCx) were calculated and 
employed for determining the relative level of antibody in the samples to positive serum (S/P) 
ratio. End point titres were calculated using the formula: log
10 Titer = 1.09(log 10S/P) + 3.36. 
Serum samples with titers greater than 396 were considered positive and indicated exposure 
to IBDV. Negative score was given to all samples with the reaction of less than 0.2 S/P ratio 
and there were to 214 (87%) of them. 
RESULTS  
Fowl pox vaccination and IBD serological testing 
The fowl pox vaccine was effective in preventing Fowl Pox outbreaks. A small 
nodular swelling appearing seven days after vaccination, indi cated successful immunization. 
The major problems encountered were those relate d to cold chain provision and the fact that 
the vaccine is dispensed in large quantities not suited to the needs of individual families or 
villages. 
Realising the health problems posed by  Fowl pox following ND control, ADRI 
initiated a research project aiming at developing a lo cal vaccine. Several strains of avian pox 
virus were isolated from local  chickens, commercia l chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl and 
pigeons. Candidate vaccinal strains have been identified after carry out multiple passages and 
determination of antigenic properties and they are now being tested in a controlled experiment 
to determine safety and efficacy. Future plans are to determine their genetic properties using 
molecular biological techniques. 
Serological results for 246 samples analys ed for IBD are summarized in Table I and 
revealed a prevalence of approximately 2.85% (7/246).  
TABLE I . SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF SEROLOGICAL SCREENING OF TANZANIAN 
CHICKENS FOR IBD USING INDIRECT ELISA TECHNIQUE. 
Location Number tested Positive/total 
number (%) 
Negative/total number (%) 
Coast (Mafia) 128 6/128 (4.7) 122/128 (95.3) 
Arusha (Arumeru) 93 1/93 (1.1) 92/93 (99.9) 
Singida 4 0/4 (0) 4/4 (100) 
Dar es salaam 
(Mmbande) 
8 0/8 (0) 8/8 (100) 
Dar es salaam 
(Tuangoma) 
13 0/13 (0) 13/13 (100) 
Totals 246 7/246 (2.85) 239/246 (97) 
273
 
Other related Activities Performed during this reporting period 
Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project (SANDCP)  
The Southern Africa Newcastle Disease Control Project (SANDCP) is a three-year 
project financed by the Australian Agency fo r International Developme nt that is supporting 
the control of ND in Mozambique, Tanzania and Malawi. The project started its activities in 
Tanzania in 2003. 
The main purpose of SANDCP is to assist  the Governments of Mozambique, Malawi 
and Tanzania to develop and implement efficient and equita ble ND control programmes to 
improve smallholder, community  and national welfare.The SA NDCP aims to promote the 
vaccination of village chickens against ND using I-2 vaccine.The project will work towards:  
• Strengthening the capability of, and rela tionship between, stakeholders in order 
to successfully implement Newcastle disease (ND) control programmesAchieving a 
decrease in chicken mortality rates caused by ND in project activity areas. 
CONCLUSIONS 
• The project may be considered to be an outstanding success in that a major 
contribution has been made to the understa nding of several constraints hindering 
family poultry production in Eastern Tanzania and Tanzania as a whole. In order to 
increase productivity from family poultry therefore, these factors must be addressed 
at least in stages.  
• Flock size and structure varied widely from 1099 chickens (average of 25.5) per 
household in wet season and 1352 (average 31.4) in the dry season. The ratio of 
chick: growers: adults was 10:10:14 in  the wet season and 11:10:10 in the dry 
season. The cocks: hen ratio was 1:3.5. 
• Average numbers of clutches per year ranged from 2.80 to 3.02 (average 2–94). 
Average number of eggs per clutch was 12 and therefore number of eggs was 36 
per hen/year. 
• Hatchability was recorded to be 84.5.and chick mortality was found to be 30% 
and resulted mainly from diseases and predation.  
• Most of households provided housing to their birds and scavenging was the 
system of feeding with limited supplem entation by household scraps and other 
feeds.  
• Newcastle disease was found to be the major constraint inhibiting rural chicken 
development. Other diseases  included respiratory syndromes, fowl pox and 
parasitic diseases (helminths, external parasitism, protozoa). It is recommended that 
control of ND in village chickens should be accompanied with Fowl pox control 
programme 
• The study has shown that given the conditions that exist in the villages, use of 
thermostable I-2 vaccine a dministered by the eye-drop method once every three 
months will protect the local chickens against ND infection (2 weeks after 
vaccination, 91.3% of chickens had seroc onverted with peak mean titre of greater 
than log2 7 and the mean peak titres remained at least log2 3 for 15 weeks after 
vaccination). The I-2 vaccine proved to be reliable (efficacy was computed at 79%). 
and easy-to-use for most people. 
274
 
• Women played a major role in family poultry development through provision of 
labour but men made the decisions on the use of the resources. 
• A standardised ELISA technique fo r both Newcastle disease and Gumboro 
disease has been established at the ADRI, which enhances the institute’s Laboratory 
diagnostic capability. 
• The socio-economic data was used to compute partial budget whereby the profit 
was calculated at 81% and household income was 5.3 times returns on investment. 
• When titration of NDV antibodies using an ELISA test was done in 80 of the HI 
tested sera, the results showed that th e relative sensitivity of ELISA to HI was 
83.78; the relative specificity was 0/6; the Predictive value of a positive result was 
91.17. If the cut-off value was changed from 30% (recommended by IAEA) to 15% 
then the relative sensitivity and the predictive value for a positive result for ELISA 
compared to HI could be improved to 95.94 and 92.2 respectively. 
• The prevalence study showed that a bout 2.85%of avian serum samples from 
local chickens examined by ELISA technique had positive results for IBDV. 
Technology Implementation Plan 
The exploitable outputs of the of the project are: 
• novel techniques for controlling ND using I-2 vaccination has been achieved. 
Use of ELISAs for the detection of NDV and IBDV antigens have been established. 
• Several factors inhibiting rural chic ken development we re identified and 
possible solutions determined and tested. 
• Partial budget determinations were utilised to determine the economic feasibility 
of ND vaccination and high rates of return obtained 
 
These outputs have been, and shall continue to be disseminated in the following ways: 
• presentations at national and international scientific meetings and conferences 
• publications in international peer-reviewed scientific journals 
• direct liaison during and after the project  with national and regional ND control 
programmes operating in Tanzania, for example the SANDCP & Family poultry 
action Group (FAPIAG). 
Training 
During the project, I attended a three-month (from 3 rd September to 2 nd December 
2001) practical training supported by Interna tional Atomic Energy Agency on "Laboratory 
aspects of the production of I-2 thermostable Ne wcastle disease vaccine" at the School of 
Veterinary Science University of Queensland Brisbane Australia. Also I was facilitated to 
attend an International Symposium on Appli cations of Gene-based Technologies for 
Improving Animal Production and Health in De veloping Countries held  in Vienna, Austria 
from October 6–10, 2003.  
275
 
Scientific exchanges were made by scientif ic staff of IAEA to contract holders and 
between contract holders themselves. Dr. Il ango of the Uganda visited and provided 
assistance with fieldwork to the ADRI in Oc tober 2001. Dr.Karim Tounkara of the PACE 
Nairobi also visited and provi ded assistance with laboratory work to the ADRI, Dar-es-
Salaam June 2001. 
Papers presented at conferences 
Msami, H.M. and A. M. Kapaga. (1999) Village Chickens In Tanzania: Situation 
Report Paper presented at the First Resear ch Coordination Meeting of The FAO/IAEA 
Coordinated Research Programme On “Assessme nt of the Effectiveness of Vaccination 
Strategies Against Newcas tle Disease and Gumboro Dis ease Using Immunoassay-based 
Technologies for Increasing Farmyard Poultry Production in Africa” Institut Agronomique et 
Veterinaire Hassan II, in Rabat, Morocco 8 to 12 February 1999 
Msami H.M. (2000) Studies on the Struct ure and Problems of Family Poultry 
Production in Tanzania with Suggestions on Improvement s and Interventions. Paper 
presented at the 2nd Research Coordination Meeting of the Coordinated Research Programme 
on "Improvement of Health a nd Management of Family Pou ltry Production in Africa" in 
collaboration with: Sokoine University of Agriculture, Morogoro, Tanzania and The Network 
for Smallholder Poultry Development, The Roya l Veterinary and Agricultural University, 
Denmark from 4 to 8 September, 2000 in Morogoro Tanzania. 
Msami H. M., (2000) Family Poultry Pr oduction Systems in Eastern Tanzania: 
Current Status and Trends on the Flock Structure and Constraints with Proposed 
Interventions. Paper presented at the 18th Ta nzania Veterinary Association Scientific 
Conference held in Arusha, Tanzania 5th to 7th December 2000  
Msami, H.M., K. Tounkara and F.M. Ki varia (2001). Serological evaluation of 
vaccination of family poultry in Tanzania against Newcastle Disease using thermostable I-2 
vaccine. Paper presented at the Veterinary Virology in Australia, 3 rd Meeting The Spradbrow 
Connection held at the Women’s College  – University of Sydney Wednesday 26 th to Friday 
28th September 2001. 
Msami, H.M., K. Tounkara, F.M. Kivaria and U. M. Minga (2002). An assessment of 
impact of selected intervention on the produc tion of family poultry in Tanzania. Paper 
presented at the 3 rd Research Coordination Meeting of the Coordinated Research Project on 
assessment of the effectiveness of vaccination strategies against Newcastle Disease and 
Gumboro Disease using immunoassay-based tec hnologies for increasing farmyard poultry 
production in Africa, held at Quatre Bornes, Mauritius, 6–10 May 2002. 
Msami, H.M. and Kapaga A.M. (2002) Proceedings of the National Training 
Workshop on Control of Newcastle Disease in Family Poultry by Vaccination Using 
Thermostable I-2 Vaccine in Selected Districts of Tanzania Dodoma, 26–30 August 2002 
sponsored by The Regional Land Management Unit-Relma and held in  Collaboration With 
Animal Diseases Research Institute, Dar Es Salaam 
Wambura P.N. and Msami H.M. 2003, Gene  Based Technology on Characterization 
of a Avirulent Thermostable Vaccine Strain I-2 of Newcastle Disease Virus  Used in Rural 
Areas of Developing C ountries. International Symposium on Applications of Gene-based 
Technologies for Improving Animal Production a nd Health in Developing Countries held in 
Vienna, Austria from October 6–10, 2003.  
276
 
Msami H.M. 2003 Extension and Training workshops on control of Newcastle disease 
in village chickens by vaccination using ther mostable I-2 vaccine in  eight districts of 
Tanzania: Experiences and lessons learnt. Animal Health Newsletter No. 3. Directorate of 
Veterinary Services, Ministry of Water and Livestock Development. Tanzania 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful for financial support from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
through the FAO/IAEA Coordinated Res earch Programme On “Assessment of the 
Effectiveness of Vaccination Strategies Ag ainst Newcastle Diseas e and Gumboro Disease 
Using Immunoassay-based Technologies for Incr easing Farmyard Poultry Production in 
Africa”. Research Contract No.: 10191/RO. The Director ADRI is acknowledged for 
provision of manpower, laboratory facilities and vehicle for project activities. 
REFERENCES 
Allan, N.H. and Gough, R.E., 1974. A standard haemagglutination inhibition test for 
Newcastle disease: 1. A compa rison of macro- and micro- methods. Vet. Rec. 95, pp. 
120¯123. 
Minga U.M., Katule A., Yongolo M. and Mwanjala T., (1996) The Rural Chicken Industry in 
Tanzania: Does it make Economic sense? .Tanzania Veterinary Journal Vol 16 
Supplementary2, pp 25–32 
Msami H.M. (2000) Studies on th e Structure and Problems of Family Poultry Production in 
Tanzania with Suggestions on Improvements and Interventions. Paper presented at the 
2nd Research Coordination Meeting of th e Co-coordinated Research Programme on 
"Improvement of Health and Management of Family Poultry Production in Africa" 
from 4 to 8 September, 2000 in Morogoro Tanzania. 
Spradbrow, P.B. 1999. Thermostable Newcastle Disease vaccine for use in village chickens. 
First INFPD/FAO Electronic Conference on Family Poultry. Free communication 10. 
Spradbrow, P.B., 1993. Newcastle disease in village chickens. Poultry Sci. Rev. 5, pp. 57¯96. 
Yongolo et al (1995). Infectious Bursal Disease and Dispharynx nasuta in village chickens. 
Tanzania Veterinary Association Conference Proceedings. Vol 16: 191–196 
Wambura P. N., Kapaga A. M. and Hyera J.  M. K. 2000 Experimental trials with a 
thermostable Newcastle disease virus (strain I2) in commercial and village chickens in 
Tanzania Prev. Vet. Med. 43, pp. 75–83. 
277
 
 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 
Azzam, A. 
 
Animal Health Research Institute,  
Dept. of Avian Diseases, Nadi El-Sied str., P.O. Box 264,  
Dokki, Giza, Egypt
 
 
Awuni, J.A. 
 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA),  
Dept. of Animal Production, Central Veterinary Lab., 
Dept. of Veterinary Services, PO Box M 161, Accra, Ghana 
 
Bell, J. 
 
Smallholder Livestock Developmen t Project in Five Southern 
Districts, Pashusampad Bhaba n, Krishikhamar Sarak, Farmgate, 
Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh 
 
Danho, T. 
 
Ministère de l'agriculture, Lab. na tional d'appui au développement 
agricole (LANADA), Lab. central de pathologie animale, 
Bingerville, BP 206, Côte d’Ivoire 
 
Dwinger, R.H. 
 
DG SANCO, European Commission, Rue de la Loi, 200, 
B-1049 Brussels, Belgium 
 
Ekue, F. 
 
Institut de recherche agricole pour le développement (IRAD), 
Production d'animale et de la pêche, Yaounde,  
B.P. 2067 ou 2123, Cameroon
 
 
Geiger, R. 
 
International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramer Strasse 5, P.O. Box 100, 
A-1400 Vienna, Austria 
Goodger, W.J. 
 
University of Wisconsin, Madison School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Dept. of Medical Sciences, Madison, Wisconsin 53706,  
United States of America 
 
Harun, M. 
 
 
Southern Africa Newcastle Dis ease Control Project, Maputo, CP 
257 Maputo, Mozambique 
 
Illango, J. 
 
National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), Livestock 
Health Research Institute, Poultry Programme, Tororo, P.O. Box 
96 Tororo, Uganda 
 
Juggessur, V.S. 
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food T echnology and Natural Resources, 
Agricultural Research and Extension Unit, 
Food and Agricultural Research Council, Reduit, Mauritius 
 
Khalafalla, A.I. 
 
University of Khartoum, Faculty of Veterinary Science, 
Khartoum, 13314 Khartoum North, Sudan 
 
Kichou, F. 
 
Institut agronomique et vétérinaire Hassan II, 
Département de Pathologie Aviaire,
 
B.P. 6202 Rabat-Instituts, Rabat, Morocco 
 
279
 
Koko 
 
Ministère de la recherche app liquée au développement, Centre 
national de la recherche appliqu ée au développement rural, Dépt. 
de recherches zootechniques et vétérinaires, Antananarivo; B.P. 04 
Antananarivo 101, Madagascar 
 
Lobo, Q. 
 
Instituto Nacional de Investigacao Veterinaria, Dept. of Vaccine 
Production, Maputo; C.P. 1922 Maputo, Mozambique 
 
Minga, U.M. 
 
Sokoine University of Agriculture, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Dept. of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology, 
Morogoro,  
P.O. Box 3000, Tanzania 
 
Msami, H.M. 
 
Ministry of Water and Livestock Development,  
Animal Diseases Research Institute, Dar es Salaam,  
P.O. Box 9254, Tanzania 
 
Njue, S. 
 
Kabete Veterinary Research Laboratories, Kabete,  
P.O. 00625, Kangemi, Nairobi, Kenya 
 
Permin, A. 
 
Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University (KVL), 
Institute for Veterinary Microbiology, Parasitology Section, 
Dyrlægevej 2, 1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark
 
 
Sonaiya, E.B. 
 
Obafemi Awolowo University, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Dept. of Animal Science, Ile-Ife, Nigeria  
 
Viljoen, G. 
 
 
International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramer Strasse 5, P.O. Box 100, 
A-1400 Vienna, Austria 
 
280
In the following countries IAEA publications may be purchased from the sources listed below, or from
major local booksellers. Payment may be made in local currency or with UNESCO coupons.
Australia
DA Information Services, 648 Whitehorse Road, MITCHAM 3132
Telephone: +61 3 9210 7777 • Fax: +61 3 9210 7788
Email: service@dadirect.com.au • Web site: http://www.dadirect.com.au
Belgium
Jean de Lannoy, avenue du Roi 202, B-1190 Brussels
Telephone: +32 2 538 43 08 • Fax: +32 2 538 08 41
Email: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be • Web site: http://www.jean-de-lannoy.be
Canada
Bernan Associates, 4611-F Assembly Drive, Lanham, MD 20706-4391, USA
Telephone: 1-800-865-3457 • Fax: 1-800-865-3450
Email: order@bernan.com • Web site: http://www.bernan.com
Renouf Publishing Company Ltd., 1-5369 Canotek Rd., Ottawa, Ontario, K1J 9J3
Telephone: +613 745 2665 • Fax: +613 745 7660
Email: order.dept@renoufbooks.com • Web site: http://www.renoufbooks.com
China
IAEA Publications in Chinese: China Nuclear Energy Industry Corporation, Translation Section, P.O. Box 2103, Beijing
Czech Republic
Suweco CZ, S.R.O. Klecakova 347, 180 21 Praha 9
Telephone: +420 26603 5364 • Fax: +420 28482 1646
Email: nakup@suweco.cz • Web site: http://www.suweco.cz
Finland
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, PL 128 (Keskuskatu 1), FIN-00101 Helsinki
Telephone: +358 9 121 41 • Fax: +358 9 121 4450
Email: akatilaus@akateeminen.com • Web site: http://www.akateeminen.com
France
Form-Edit, 5, rue Janssen, P.O. Box 25, F-75921 Paris Cedex 19
Telephone: +33 1 42 01 49 49 • Fax: +33 1 42 01 90 90 • Email: formedit@formedit.fr
Lavoisier SAS, 145 rue de Provigny, 94236 Cachan Cedex
Telephone: + 33 1 47 40 67 02 • Fax +33 1 47 40 67 02
Email: romuald.verrier@lavoisier.fr • Web site: http://www.lavoisier.fr
Germany
UNO-Verlag, Vertriebs- und Verlags GmbH, Am Hofgarten 10, D-53113 Bonn
Telephone: + 49 228 94 90 20 • Fax: +49 228 94 90 20 or +49 228 94 90 222
Email: bestellung@uno-verlag.de • Web site: http://www.uno-verlag.de
Hungary
Librotrade Ltd., Book Import, P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Telephone: +36 1 257 7777 • Fax: +36 1 257 7472 • Email: books@librotrade.hu 
India
Allied Publishers Group, 1st Floor, Dubash House, 15, J. N. Heredia Marg, Ballard Estate, Mumbai 400 001,
Telephone: +91 22 22617926/27 • Fax: +91 22 22617928
Email: alliedpl@vsnl.com • Web site: http://www.alliedpublishers.com
Bookwell, 2/72, Nirankari Colony, Delhi 110009
Telephone: +91 11 23268786, +91 11 23257264 • Fax: +91 11 23281315
Email: bookwell@vsnl.net
Italy
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio di Biasio “AEIOU”, Via Coronelli 6, I-20146 Milan
Telephone: +39 02 48 95 45 52 or 48 95 45 62 • Fax: +39 02 48 95 45 48
Japan
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 13-6 Nihonbashi, 3 chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-0027
Telephone: +81 3 3275 8582 • Fax: +81 3 3275 9072
Email: journal@maruzen.co.jp • Web site: http://www.maruzen.co.jp
Where to order IAEA publications
No. 20, August 2005

Korea, Republic of
KINS Inc., Information Business Dept. Samho Bldg. 2nd Floor, 275-1 Yang Jae-dong SeoCho-G, Seoul 137-130
Telephone: +02 589 1740 • Fax: +02 589 1746
Email: sj8142@kins.co.kr • Web site: http://www.kins.co.kr
Netherlands
De Lindeboom Internationale Publicaties B.V., M.A. de Ruyterstraat 20A, NL-7482 BZ Haaksbergen
Telephone: +31 (0) 53 5740004 • Fax: +31 (0) 53 5729296
Email:  books@delindeboom.com • Web site: http://www.delindeboom.com
Martinus Nijhoff International, Koraalrood 50, P.O. Box 1853, 2700 CZ Zoetermeer
Telephone: +31 793 684 400 • Fax: +31 793 615 698 • Email: info@nijhoff.nl • Web site: http://www.nijhoff.nl
Swets and Zeitlinger b.v., P.O. Box 830, 2160 SZ Lisse
Telephone: +31 252 435 111 • Fax: +31 252 415 888 • Email: infoho@swets.nl • Web site: http://www.swets.nl
New Zealand
DA Information Services, 648 Whitehorse Road, MITCHAM 3132, Australia
Telephone: +61 3 9210 7777 • Fax: +61 3 9210 7788
Email: service@dadirect.com.au • Web site: http://www.dadirect.com.au
Slovenia
Cankarjeva Zalozba d.d., Kopitarjeva 2, SI-1512 Ljubljana
Telephone: +386 1 432 31 44 • Fax: +386 1 230 14 35
Email: import.books@cankarjeva-z.si • Web site: http://www.cankarjeva-z.si/uvoz
Spain
Díaz de Santos, S.A., c/ Juan Bravo, 3A, E-28006 Madrid
Telephone: +34 91 781 94 80 • Fax: +34 91 575 55 63 • Email: compras@diazdesantos.es
carmela@diazdesantos.es • barcelona@diazdesantos.es • julio@diazdesantos.es 
Web site: http://www.diazdesantos.es
United Kingdom
The Stationery Office Ltd, International Sales Agency, PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1 GN
Telephone (orders): +44 870 600 5552 • (enquiries): +44 207 873 8372 • Fax: +44 207 873 8203
Email (orders): book.orders@tso.co.uk • (enquiries): book.enquiries@tso.co.uk • Web site: http://www.tso.co.uk
On-line orders:
DELTA Int. Book Wholesalers Ltd., 39 Alexandra Road, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 2PQ
Email: info@profbooks.com • Web site: http://www.profbooks.com
Books on the Environment:
Earthprint Ltd., P.O. Box 119, Stevenage SG1 4TP
Telephone: +44 1438748111 • Fax: +44 1438748844
Email: orders@earthprint.com • Web site: http://www.earthprint.com
United Nations (UN)
Dept. I004, Room DC2-0853, First Avenue at 46th Street, New York, N.Y. 10017, USA
Telephone: +800 253-9646 or +212 963-8302 • Fax: +212 963-3489
Email: publications@un.org • Web site: http://www.un.org
United States of America
Bernan Associates, 4611-F Assembly Drive, Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Telephone: 1-800-865-3457 • Fax: 1-800-865-3450
Email: order@bernan.com • Web site: http://www.bernan.com
Renouf Publishing Company Ltd., 812 Proctor Ave., Ogdensburg, NY, 13669
Telephone: +888 551 7470 (toll-free) • Fax: +888 568 8546 (toll-free)
Email: order.dept@renoufbooks.com • Web site: http://www.renoufbooks.com
Orders and requests for information may also be addressed directly to:
Sales and Promotion Unit, International Atomic Energy Agency
Wagramer Strasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria
Telephone: +43 1 2600 22529 (or 22530) • Fax: +43 1 2600 29302
Email: sales.publications@iaea.org • Web site: http://www.iaea.org/books
06-04081