# Hybrid Maize Seed Production Manual
# publisher: Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Ghana — via NASTAG
# year: unknown
# url: https://nastag.org/docx/resources/Hybrid%20Maize%20Production%20Manual.pdf
# attribution: MoFA Ghana, Hybrid Maize Seed Production Manual
# ghana_specific: True
# extent: 80 pages
#
# Extracted text follows. Provenance above travels with every chunk
# derived from this document.

MINISTRY OF
REPUBLIC OF GHANA
FOOD & AGRICULTURE
HYBRID MAIZE 
SEED PRODUCTION 
M A N U A L


Table of Contents
List of Tables 3
List of Figures 4
Acknowledgement 6
Foreword  7
List of Abbreviations 9
1.0. General Introduction 10
1.1. What is Hybrid Maize? 11
1.2. Hybrid Composition 12
1.3. What is Heterosis (Hybrid Vigor)? 12
1.4. Hybrid Cultivars 14
2.0. Line Development for a Hybrid Seed Production 16
2.1. Cultivar Release, Seed Multiplication and Certification in Ghana 19
2.2. Causes of loss of genetic purity during seed multiplication 22
2.3. Choosing the Right Parental Lines for Hybrid Seed Production 22
3.0. Field Management Operations for Maize Hybrid Seed Production  25
3.1. Site Selection 25
3.2. Land Preparation 26
3.3. Plant Establishment 27
3.3.1. Seeding Rate and Germination Tests 28
3.3.2. Planting Date/Time Based on Agro-Ecological Zone 28
3.3.3. Spacing and Plant Population 30
3.3.4. Planting the Right Female: Male Ratio  32
3.4. Synchronization of flowering 34
3.5. Fertilizer and Irrigation Requirements  35
3.5.1. Fertilizer Requirements 35
3.5.2. Soil Testing 36
3.5.3. Types of Fertilizers  38
3.5.4. Modes of Fertilizer Application 39
3.5.5. Time of Fertilizer Application 40
3.5.6. Irrigation Requirements 41
3.6. Weed Control 43
3.7. Common diseases and their control 45
3.8. Common Insect Pests of Maize and Their Management  51
3.9. Rouging  63
3.9.1. When to Rogue 64
3.10. Detasseling 65
3.11. Male Removal 66
3.12. Harvesting and Post-Harvest Processing 67
3.13. Seed Bagging and Labelling 68
3.14. Seed Storage 69
3.15. Bulk Storage of Seed 72
3.16. Record keeping 73
4.0. Conclusion 74
5.0. Bibliography 75
List of Tables
Table 1. Estimation of hybrid superiority in grain yield over its inbred parents. 14
Table 2. A guide for inbred line development for a small commercial breeding 
program for hybrid maize in Ghana. 18
Table 3. GCA for maize grain yield (t/ha) in crosses between heterotic groups 23
Table 4. SCA for maize grain yield (t/ha) in crosses between heterotic groups 23
Table 5. Recommended seeding rate after germination tests. 28
Table 6. Suggested planting dates for maize in Ghana. 30
Table 7. Common low and high plant population densities and their planting 
distances for maize. 33
Table 8. Selection of an irrigation method based on the depth of the net irrigation 
application. 42
Table 9. Common herbicides for controlling weeds on maize fields. 44
List of Figures
Figure 1. Common types of conventional hybrids in maize 12
Figure 2. Hybrid vigor in maize. 13
Figure 3. Line development for hybrid seed production 17
Figure 4. Classes of pedigree seed in Ghana’s certification system. 21
Figure 5. Pictorial Identification of Parents. 24
Figure 6. Main agro-ecological zones of Ghana. 26
Figure 7. Planting maize in lines at a given inter and intra row spacing. 31
Figure 8. Effect of plant population on the yield of maize.  32
Figure 9. Setting a 3:1 female to male plants ratio in a hybrid maize seed field. 34
Figure 10. Common female to male planting ratio on the field. 34
Figure 11. Maize leaves expressing signs of major nutrient deficiency. 36
Figure 12. Soil sampling tools showing a spade and an auger. 37
Figure 13. A v-shaped cut made with a spade to collect soil samples. 37
Figure 14. Band placement of fertilizer to plants. 40
Figure 15. Ring and point placement of fertilizer to plants. 40
Figure 16. Maize yield reduction due to water deficit. 41
Figure 17. Sprinkler and furrow irrigation system for maize. 43
Figure 18. A maize field infested with Striga. 45
Figure 19. Detasseling of the tassel from female plants before pollen shedding. 66
Figure 20. Removal of male plants after pollination. 67
Figure 21. Sorting of cobs on the field or at shelling site. 68
Figure 22. Diagram illustrating the combinations of temperature and MC (or ERH) at 
which different organisms can grow in storage for maize. 70
Figure 23. Measurement of relative humidity (RH) and its relationship to product 
moisture content (MC) and storage potential. 71
Figure 24. Stored seed in labelled bags in well-constructed stacks on pallets with a 
bin card to monitor stock quantities. 72
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
6
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture expresses thanks to the wide range of 
stakeholders, partners and officials from various ministries, departments, agencies, 
universities and companies who, in diverse ways, assisted in the development of 
this Hybrid Maize Seed Production Manual. 
Special commendations go to Mr. Seth Osei-Akoto, the Acting Director of Crop 
Services of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture,  whose  support and direction 
made this process come to a successful fruition; Our special thanks go to Mr Richard 
Tuwmasi-Ankrah, the head of the Planting for Food and Jobs Secretariat under whose 
leadership this document was conceived. We would like to express our appreciation 
to members of the National Seed Trade Association of Ghana (NASTAG) and Dr. 
Beatrice Elohor Ifie of the West Africa Centre for Crop Improvement (UG-WACCI) 
as well as Mr. Collins Oppong of the Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services  
(DAES) for their constructive criticism that shaped the development process. 
We specifically acknowledge the technical contributions and directions of Dr. 
Solomon Gyan Ansah, Deputy Director and Head of the Seed Unit of the Directorate 
of Crop Services, Mr. Rowland Adjei Addo, Mr Isaac Agyare and Ms Helena Akyen 
all of the Directorate of Crop Services as well as Mr. Jefferson Attipoe (FAO-Ghana).
The Ministry wishes to express its gratitude to the Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations (FAO) for providing the necessary support in developing this 
manual and assigning Prof. Richard Akromah of the Kwame Nkrumah University of 
Science and Technology and his team for developing this Manual.  
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
7
FOREWORD
Improved seed is an input in crop production system to obtain higher yield, tolerate 
pest and disease incidence, adapt to climate change and improve nutrition. 
Improved seed determines the efficiency of all other inputs of crop production 
since a significant contribution to productivity is gained solely from the seed used. 
Knowledge of this has popularized the use of hybrid seed in modern agriculture. 
Owing to the advantages of the state-of-the-art technology delivered by hybrid 
varieties over Open-Pollinated Varieties (OPVs), farmers in Ghana are gradually 
shifting from OPVs to Hybrids as exhibited by maize farmers under the “Planting for 
Food and Jobs” Campaign. This new development, coupled with the importation 
of hybrid maize seed due to its limited production in Ghana, has necessitated the 
compilation of this hybrid maize seed production manual which will serve as a 
guide for maize seed producers to successfully produce quality hybrid maize seeds 
for farmers. 
This hybrid maize seed production manual is designed to provide guidelines on 
the production of different types of hybrid maize seeds. It is also hoped that this 
manual will contribute modestly to the goal of entrenching and increasing hybrid 
seed production in Ghana. 
The lead author of this manual, Professor Richard Akromah, is a lecturer at the 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology. Professor Akromah 
has many years’ experience in Research and Plant Breeding and has offered 
training to Plant Breeding experts in-country and outside the country. Due to his 
vast experience, he has been consulted on many occasions by both national 
and international organizations for important agricultural development works. In 
compiling this manual, he sought expert opinion from wide range of seed sector 
stakeholders which include; Seed producers, Researchers, Agriculturists, Extension 
officers and seed marketers/traders and other actors of the seed value chain to 
enrich the document. 
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
8
May I seize this moment to commend the author and all the experts whose opinion 
were sought to compile this manual. Our sincere gratitude goes to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for their technical support in the 
preparation of this manual. 
It is expected that our diligent seed producers and all other stakeholders along the 
maize seed value chain would utilize the information in this manual to enhance 
hybrid maize seed production in Ghana. 
SETH OSEI-AKOTO
DIRECTOR OF CROP SERVICES

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
9
AEAs Agricultural Extension Agents
BP Better Parent
BPH Better Parent Heterosis
DAES Directorate of Agricultural Extension Services 
DCS Directorate of Crop Services
DUS Distinctness, Uniformity and Stability
F1 First Offspring
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GCA General Combining Ability
KNUST Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
LGB Larger Grain Borer
MC Moisture Content
MoFA Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
MP Mid Parent
NASTAG National Seed Trade Association of Ghana 
NSC National Seed Council
NVRRC National Varietal Release and Registration Committee
OPVs Open-Pollinated Varieties 
RH Relative Humidity
SCA Specific Combining Ability
SRI Soil Research Institute
UG-WACCI University of Ghana-West Africa Centre for Crop Improvement 
UN United Nations
VCU Value for Cultivation and Use
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
10
Farmers need hybrid seeds with high yield potential and unique gene combinations 
to withstand diseases and hostile environmental conditions. Nonetheless, the field 
production methods of a hybrid seed determine its quality, which must adhere to 
both quality assurance standards and proper agronomic management practices. 
Whereas production of open pollinated seeds from maize is comparatively 
straightforward, production of hybrid seed requires extra skills that are indispensable 
to the success of producing hybrids.
Production of maize hybrid seed is a deliberate act to cross the population of the 
female parent with a male parent in an isolated field. Thus, from the outset, the 
identity and arrangement of the female and male parental lines in the field would 
determine the outcome of hybrid seed production. Each hybrid variety consists 
of a specific combination of a female (seed bearing) and male (pollen providing) 
parents. The management of the field containing the two parents is very pertinent 
and needs attention to timing of planting, detasseling of the females before anthesis 
and pollen shedding, off-types elimination, separate harvesting of the female seed 
and careful shelling and processing of the seed to maintain seed quality and purity. 
The processes of producing hybrid maize seeds are sequential and dependent, 
implying that any mistake made at the early stages will have significant impact on 
subsequent stages. Such avoidable errors could result in a total rejection of seeds 
by inspectors or total failure of the crop.
From April to July 2019, the Ghana Office of the Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations, through a Technical Cooperation Programme, collaborated 
with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture and engaged KNUST to train selected 
Seed Companies on Hybrid Maize Seed Production. This Manual is in response to a 
request by the participants of the Workshop for a Production Manual that provides 
special management skills for producing high quality hybrid seed and contains 
basic information on choosing the right parents, site selection, setting planting ratios 
of male and female parents, synchronization of flowering, detasseling, rogueing, 
harvesting and post-harvest operations for growers to produce high quality hybrid 
1.0 General Introduction

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
11
seeds to farmers for increased productivity. The current manual also provides 
valuable insights into how seed companies could develop their own inbred lines 
for commercial purposes.
1.1 What is Hybrid Maize?
Hybrid maize is an F1 generation (first offspring) resulting from crossing of two or 
more genetically different parents. The female plant bears the hybrid (F1) seed and 
it is called the female or seed parent, whereas the pollen parent or the male plant 
is the plant that provides the pollen to fertilize the female. Maize has separate male 
and female plant parts and it is relatively easy to make a cross between two plants. 
In producing hybrid seeds on the field, male and female parents are planted in 
sequential row patterns, usually with three-to-six times the number of female plants 
or rows to a single male plant or row. Detasseling of the female plant is done before 
pollen is shed, so that the tassel on the male plants would be the only source of 
pollen for the female flower (the cob or the ear) on the female plants. It is necessary 
to remove the tassels of the female to prevent self-pollination of the female plant. If 
this occurs, which is referred to as “female-selfing”, the result is a significant loss of 
seed quality that will clearly be visible in a crop grown from the seed. Female-selfing 
is to be avoided at all costs. The number of female rows in proportion to male rows 
in the field is usually on the order of 3:1 for single-crosses and three-ways but may 
increase to 8:1 for double-cross hybrids. Number of factors account for the actual 
ratio that are planted, but mostly on the quantity of pollen produced by the male 
parent. After a successful cross pollination and fertilization, the seed harvested 
from the female parent is the hybrid seed that contains a unique heterozygous 
genotype and the ensuing plant produced from the hybrid seed will have desirable 
characteristics of both parents. Plant breeders (or Seed Companies) develop 
parental lines of each hybrid to produce an offspring with unique and particular 
characteristics, which includes drought tolerance, heat stress tolerance, grain color, 
disease resistance, plant maturity, food processing quality and higher yield. It is this 
special hybrid seed that are being sown by farmers in their fields.
Maize hybrids can be classified into two broad categories:
Conventional hybrids : Obtained by crossing two or more genetically different 
inbred lines. Examples are Single Single-cross, three-way and double-cross hybrids 
are the most common types of maize hybrids. A single-cross hybrid is made by 
crossing two inbred lines; a three-way hybrid is made by crossing a single-cross 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
12
hybrid with an inbred line, while a double-cross hybrid is made by crossing two 
Single-cross hybrids. Examples are single cross, three-way cross and double cross 
hybrids as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Common types of conventional hybrids in maize
Non-conventional hybrids : At least one parent is not an inbred line. Example, 
variety cross, top cross and double top cross hybrids. A top-cross hybrid is made 
from an open-pollinated variety crossed with an inbred line, while a varietal cross is 
a hybrid of two unrelated open-pollinated varieties.
1.2 Hybrid Composition
Inbred lines are the basic building blocks of hybrid maize. Inbred lines are developed 
from the repeated self-pollination of particular maize populations to produce a plant 
that essentially has a fixed and uniform genetic composition. Subsequently, all 
inbred lines of a particular plant are indistinguishable, yet each inbred line will vary 
in its genetic composition from other inbred lines. Because maize is normally cross-
pollinated, repeated self-pollination results in inbreeding depression; thus, inbred 
lines are usually smaller, less vigorous and lower-yielding than open-pollinated 
maize plants. But, when two genetically dissimilar inbred lines are crossed, a hybrid 
seed is formed, which produces plants with restored vigor and a significantly higher 
yield than either of the two parents. This hybrid superiority is known as “hybrid 
vigor,” and it is this vigor that is exploited in hybrids and makes hybrid varieties 
useful to farmers.
1.3. What is Heterosis (Hybrid Vigor)?
Hybrid maize is based on the principle of heterosis (hybrid vigor) in plant breeding. 
It is the superiority in performance of hybrid individuals compared with their parents 
(Figure 2). The occurrence of heterosis is common in plant species, but its level of 
expression is highly variable.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
13
Figure 2. Hybrid vigor in maize. F1 hybrid (middle) which has a superior 
performance compared with the parents (on either side)
Heterosis can either be expressed as percent increase or decrease in hybrid (F1) 
performance over mid-parental (MP) value:
or better parent (BP) value:

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
14
Table 1. Estimation of hybrid superiority in grain yield over its inbred parents.
Grain yield (t/ha)
Lines A B C A/B A/C B/C
Yield 1.5 1 1.4 4 6 5
 Heterosis estimates
MP (t/ha) MPH (%) BPH (%)
A/B 1.25 220 166.7
A/C 1.45 313.8 300.0
B/C 1.20 316.7 257.1
Some estimations of heterosis have been provided in the Table 1.
1.4. Hybrid Cultivars
 Hybrid vigor is highest at the F1 and declines in subsequent generations upon self-
pollination due to a reduction in heterozygosity. Thus, as the number of heterozygous 
genotypes decreases in a seed lot, the amount of heterosis expressed would 
decrease, as a result of inbreeding depression. The amount of vigor expressed is 
also contingent on the type of hybrid seed produced and the level of uniformity 
among F1 materials constituting the hybrid seed lot. Hybrid vigor, thus, decreases 
in order of magnitude from single cross hybrids > three-way cross hybrids > double-
cross hybrids etc. However, in terms of hybrid seed yield, synthesizing a double-
cross hybrid yields the highest quantity of hybrid seeds followed by three-ways 
cross hybrids, and single cross hybrids. Thus, regarding cost of hybrid seeds, single 
cross hybrid seeds are the highest and double-cross hybrid seeds command the 
lowest cost.
For hybrid seeds, farmers are advised not to save seeds from previous season’s 
harvest for replanting to prevent a decline in hybrid vigor expression. This advice 
is strongly recommended because, when a hybrid seed is grown and it in turn sets 
seeds upon maturing on farmers’ fields, the harvest from the hybrid field would be 
a heterogeneous mixture of different genotypes of seeds. Since a hybrid plant is 
chiefly heterozygous in genotype, upon self or cross pollination, it would segregate 
into other genotypes, comprising both homozygotes and heterozygotes. The 
presence of the homozygous genotypes in the harvested seeds from a hybrid plant 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
15
would cause inbreeding depression in the ensuing plants when planted, and one 
cannot phenotypically identify true hybrid seeds from the harvest. It is, therefore, 
advisable for farmers to buy true hybrid seeds for each season’s planting from 
certified sources in order to derive the full benefits of hybrid seed technology.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
16
The success of hybrid seed technology depends on the availability of inbred lines 
possessing the desirable attributes of the hybrid cultivar based on the expected 
product profile or target. Inbreds are developed using conventional methods of 
repeated selfing of a derived F1 between two or more parents or using modern 
techniques such as doubled haploid technology.
Doubled haploid technology helps to rapidly produce inbred lines 
within a relatively short time compared with repeated selfing of 
derived F1.
After line development, the next important step is to evaluate the developed lines 
to ascertain their performance in hybrid combinations with known testers (Figure 
3). Table 2 shows a guide for developing inbred lines for a small commercial maize 
breeding program for hybrid maize.
A tester is another inbred line which serves as a partner for testing 
derived inbred lines in hybrid combinations.
This evaluation exercise enables the identification of lines that show the highest 
combining abilities or heterosis for grain yield across the target markets. Of utmost 
importance in hybrid seed technology, is the categorization of derived inbred lines 
into heterotic groups as well as heterotic patterns.
A heterotic group is defined as “a group of related or unrelated 
genotypes from the same or different populations, which display 
similar combining ability and heterotic response when crossed 
with genotypes from other genetically distinct germplasm 
groups” (Melchinger and Gumber 1998). A heterotic pattern, on 
the other hand, refers to a specific pair of two heterotic groups, 
which express high heterosis and consequently high hybrid 
performance in their cross.
2.0 Line Development for a  
Hybrid Seed Production

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
17
Classifying lines into heterotic groups would prevent the development and 
evaluation of crosses that should be discarded, allowing maximum heterosis to be 
exploited by crossing inbred lines belonging to different heterotic groups.
Inbred line development as shown in Table 2, and the 
determination of heterotic groups and patterns take time 
depending on the method adopted and must be done by an 
expert.
There are two types of combining abilities that are usually estimated from testcross 
evaluations; namely: the general and specific combining abilities.
The general combining ability (GCA) measures the mean 
performance of an inbred line when it is crossed with a series 
of other inbreds or testers. Whereas, the specific combining 
ability (SCA) is due to genetic effects that are specific to a hybrid 
combination and that are not accounted for by the GCA effects of 
its parents.
A specific pair of inbred lines that show high heterosis would equally exhibit high 
SCA. Tables 3 and 4 show the estimation of GCA and SCA for four inbred lines (A – 
D) using three testers (E –F).
                                     
                                                     
  F1         
      
                                                  
                                                 
                                                                     
                                             
         
                              
The tester is another inbred which serves as 
partner for testing derived inbreds in hybrid 
combination 
Performance test of testcrosses 
Parent 1 x Parent 2 
Inbreds x Tester (s) 
New inbreds and hybrids 
 
Figure 3. Line development for hybrid seed production

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
18
Table 2. A guide for inbred line development for a small commercial 
breeding program for hybrid maize in Ghana.
Season  Activity
Major, Year 1 (1) Grow 40 F 2 or BC 1 populations (i.e., S 0 generation) that have 
been formed in previous years.
(2) Cross 50 selected S 0 plants in each population to a haploid 
inducer++.
Minor, Year 1  Double the chromosomes of putative haploids to create doubled 
haploids++.
Major, Year 2  Self doubled haploids to increase seeds.
Minor, Year 2 (1) Discard about 25 % of the derived doubled haploids based on 
per se performance.
(2) Cross each of the 1500 remaining doubled haploids to an 
appropriate inbred tester.
Major, Year 3  Yield trials of 1500 doubled-haploid testcrosses in unreplicated 
trials at 2 - 4 locations in the target area.
Minor, Year 3 (1) Select top 10 % of doubled haploids based on their testcross 
performance.
(2) Cross 150 doubled haploids to 2 testers each.
Major, Year 4 Yield trials of 300 doubled-haploid testcrosses in unreplicated 
trials at 4 - 6
Locations in the target area.
Minor, Year 4 (1) Select top 10 % of doubled haploids based on their testcross 
performance.
(2) Cross each doubled haploid to 3 elite inbreds or testers.
Major, Year 5 First replicated yield trials of experimental hybrids at 5 – 15 
locations.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
19
Minor, Year 5 (1) Second replicated yield trials of advanced hybrids at 5 - 20 
locations.
(2) On-farm tests (i.e., 50 - 150 m2 plots) at 20 - 50 locations/sites.
Major, Year 6  On-farm tests of precommercial hybrids at 50-100 locations/
sites.
Minor, Year 6  Release 0-2 new hybrids.
++: These activities should be outsourced to a commercial entity with the 
expertise to produce doubled haploid plants. On-farm tests could be done 
on farmers’ fields. Minor season evaluations require irrigation facilities to 
supplement rainfall.
2.1.  Cultivar Release, Seed Multiplication and Certification in Ghana
The ultimate goal of a commercial breeding program for hybrid maize is to release 
a hybrid variety with high yield and superior performance to existing cultivars 
(commercial heterosis). After rigorous testing of promising hybrid combinations 
in different environments (location/season/year) as depicted in Table 2, the seed 
company will select one or few hybrid combinations for release to the agricultural 
system for use. The new hybrid cultivar may be released for specific adaptation or 
broad adaptation in target areas. For a hybrid cultivar, the parental lines are the most 
precious assets to the seed company and must be protected.
One of the decisions during cultivar release is naming the new hybrid cultivar. The 
specific steps of cultivar release process vary among countries. In Ghana, there is 
the National Varietal Release and Registration Committee (NVRRC) under the 
National Seed Council (NSC).
A new cultivar submitted for release must satisfy DUS/VCU criteria. DUS stands for 
distinctness, uniformity and stability, while VCU means value for cultivation and use. 
For hybrids, the DUS/VCU criteria are applied to the parental lines.
Based on the reports of the evaluation, the NVRRC will recommend to the NSC 
to register the new variety in the national catalogue of species and varieties of 
cultivated crops.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
20
After developing, naming, release and registering a new hybrid 
variety, the seed company must make the hybrid cultivar available 
for commercial multiplication for sale.
Seed multiplication is under the supervision of a certifying agency for compliance 
with genetic purity and identity of the original source.
The seed certification system is a legally sanctioned system to 
maintain quality of seeds during multiplication, post-harvest 
operations, and distribution. Thus, it is a quality assurance 
process.
Seed certification involves field inspection, seed quality tests, and pre/post-harvest 
quality checks of pedigree seeds.
“A pedigree seed is seed of a named cultivar that is produced 
under strict supervision of a certifying agency for compliance 
with genetic purity and identity of the original source.”
It is the legal obligation of a commercial seed company to maintain the marketable 
form of a newly introduced hybrid cultivar, so that it can be released at intervals as 
needed in its authentic form for commercial multiplication. In Ghana, the following 
classes of pedigree seed is recognized during multiplication (Figure 4):
• The pre-basic/breeder seed: this class of seed is under the direct control 
of the developer of the cultivar. The developer assumes responsibility 
for maintaining the genetic constitution and purity of parental lines. The 
breeder seed has the highest level of genetic purity of any class of seeds. 
The breeder seed is used to establish foundation seed. Generally, farmers do 
not have access to the breeder seed. It is usually given a white with diagonal 
violet stripes tag for quick identification.
• Foundation/basic seed: this is the first generation increase or progenies 
of the breeder seed. Its genetic purity is close to the breeder seed and it can 
be used to directly produce certified seeds or through registered seeds. It is 
usually given a white tag for identification.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
21
• Registered seed: it is produced directly from foundation seeds and serves 
as the source for certified seeds. It is normally grown by farmers under 
contract with a seed company. Registered seed may be commercially 
accessible to farmers for use. It is usually given a purple tag for identification.
• Certified seed:  it can be produced directly from foundation seeds 
or through registered seeds. It is grown in isolated fields under legally 
prescribed conditions to satisfy the minimum genetic purity and identity of 
the cultivar. This class of seed is what usually goes on sale to farmers for 
commercial use.
Generally, as one moves from the breeder through to the certified 
seed category, there is exponential increase in seed quantity, but 
genetic purity decreases.
 
Figure 4. Classes of pedigree seed in Ghana’s certification system.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
22
2.2.  Causes of loss of genetic purity during seed multiplication
During seed multiplication, genetic purity may be lost through one or a combination 
of the following reasons:
• Mechanical admixture
• Natural outcrossing due to pollen contamination from nearby fields
• Mutations
• Multiplying seeds of the variety in an area of non-adaptation
Preventive measures for ensuring high genetic purity include:
• Plant in isolation either by distance or by time. Isolation by either distance or 
time, should be considered because it prevents contamination by foreign 
pollen. Isolation by time is strongly recommended, hence, it is advisable to 
install irrigation facilities to augment precipitation. The minimum isolation 
distance recommended is 400 meters for maize in Ghana.
• Rogue out off-types.
• Plant in areas of crop adaptation.
• Enforce quality control measures (e.g. sanitation, cleaning of equipment).
2.3. Choosing the Right Parental Lines for Hybrid Seed Production
The success of a hybrid maize seed production system depends on the selection of 
the right inbred lines as parents. As explained above, parents are selected in hybrid 
maize seed production based on their combining abilities or heterotic responses. 
Inbred lines that have exhibited high hybrid vigor (better-parent and commercial 
heterosis) for grain yield and other important agronomic traits must be used as 
parental lines.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
23
Table 3. GCA for maize grain yield (t/ha) in crosses between heterotic groups 
(Data from Bernardo, 2014)
Inbred A B C D Mean GCA
E 11.33 10.41 9.71 10.18 10.41 0.2
F 11.05 11.42 9.3 9.07 10.21 0
G 10.54 9.93 9.36 10.25 10.02 -0.19
Mean 10.97 10.59 9.46 9.83 10.21
GCA 0.76 0.37 -0.76 -0.38
GCA = MP of inbred  − 𝜇; Where MP = mean of hybrid combination of an inbred; 𝜇 
= overall mean ( 10.21 t/ha) in Table 3. Eg. For line B, its GCA = 10.59 – 10.21 = 
0.37. Similarly, the GCA of line F = 10.21 – 10.21 = 0.
Table 4. SCA for maize grain yield (t/ha) in crosses between heterotic groups 
(Data from Bernardo, 2014)
Inbred A B C D
E 0.16 -0.37 0.06 0.15
F 0.08 0.84 -0.15 -0.76
G -0.24 -0.46 0.1 0.61
SCA = HP − 𝜇 − GCA1 − GCA2 ; Where HP = hybrid performance; GCA1& GCA2 = GCA 
of parent 1 & 2. Eg. For hybrid F/B, HP = 11.42, 𝜇 = 10.21, GCA of line F = 0, GCA of
line B = 0.37 from Table 3, so its SCA is calculated as = 11.42 - 10.21 - 0 -0.37 = 
0.84
Based on the SCA estimates in Table 4, it could be seen that inbred line B, and tester 
F would make a very good pair for hybrid seed production.
Parental lines usually have specific distinguishable morphological characteristics 
that help to easily identify them in the field. Common distinguishable features 
include anthocyanin pigmentation in the stem or other parts of the plant as depicted 
in Figure 5.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
24
Figure 5. Pictorial Identification of Parents. Adapted from Ethiopian Seed 
Association (2014).

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
25
Achieving reasonable seed yields on seed plots after choosing the right parents 
requires paying critical attention to good plant production, protection and post-
production management practices. These management operations include:
• Appropriate site selection
• Adequate land preparation
• Planting high quality seeds of parental lines
• Setting the right planting ratio of male and female plants
• Synchronization of flowering
• Ensuring good soil nutrient and water management practices
• Post-planting measures against weeds, pests and diseases.
• Detasseling of female lines in the field before pollen shedding
• Roguing of off types to ensure genetic purity
• Timely harvesting and post-harvest operations such as shelling, cleaning, 
sorting, drying, storage and packaging.
3.1.  Site Selection
In hybrid seed production, the best field on the farm should be utilized. The important 
factors that must be considered include the following:
• Choose land with deep well drained loamy soils.
• Avoid planting maize in shady areas.
• Choose gently sloping to nearly flat upland. Low-lying valley bottoms are 
usually poorly drained and easily get waterlogged; thus, reducing yield.
3.0. Field Management Operations 
for Maize Hybrid Seed Production

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
26
• Where possible, choose land that has not been cropped to cereals in the 
previous year. It will help to reduce carry-over of diseases. Avoid planting in 
fields that were previously sown to maize, for at least one year.
• Moisture and fertility status of selected site must be known.
• It is also desirable to avoid areas with significant movement of people and 
animals.
• Choose sites with accessible roads to facilitate the delivery of inputs, 
inspection and the transport of the harvested seed to processing centre/
customers.
• The size of the field must be known due to the time pressure for detasseling 
in hybrid seed fields. A maximum field size of 1 to 4 ha should be planted 
at one time, depending on labor availability. Blocks of about 1 ha are most 
manageable for detasseling and quality assurance. Larger fields may not 
allow efficient detasseling. However, smaller fields may increase the risk of 
foreign pollen contamination.
• Field map, in establishing the size of the field, plays a major role in determining 
isolation distances and for future records.
• Registration of the seed crop: normally seed regulation authorities require 
seed fields to be registered within a short time of establishment. Ensure that 
this is done.
3.2.  Land Preparation
Land should be ready for planting two weeks in advance in order to allow weed 
seeds to germinate; it is the first stage of weed control. Off-type plants could easily be 
identified and rogued out upon re-emergence. Land can be adequately prepared 
manually or mechanically.
Manual land preparation involves the following operations:
• Slashing bushy weedy fields
• Removal of stumps of shrubs (where possible) to facilitate ploughing
• In some areas (particularly the Guinea savanna zone), hoeing to loosen the 
soil is done before planting.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
27
Mechanical land preparation requires the use of a tractor or animal traction.
• Slash weedy field before ploughing (do not burn).
• If previous crop was a legume and vegetation is not thick, plough in the 
biomass.
• Plough and harrow to break soil lumps. Sometimes two ploughings may 
be necessary.
• Plough across the slope if the field is not level. You can practice contour 
farming, if the need arises.
Zero/No tillage involves the use of herbicides. Glyphosate has been the herbicide 
of choice and is applied at the rate of 3 - 4 litres per ha.
• Leave sprayed area for about five days after applying glyphosate.
• Plant into stubble (clear by parting vegetation) i.e. vegetation along planting 
line.
• Reduce dry vegetation by controlled or cold burning, or physical removal of 
vegetation from field.
3.3.  Plant Establishment
Good seed material is the basic input for increasing seed yield and income. It 
ensures varietal purity and high crop productivity. Irrespective of cultural practice, 
poor seed will result in:
• Poor germination
• Poor crop establishment
• Poor plant vigor
• Carry over of diseases and pests
• Low seed yields.
The following are important factors to consider for healthy plant establishment in 
the field:

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
28
3.3.1. Seeding Rate and Germination Tests
A seed rate of about 25 kg/ha is required, but this depends on the seed size and 
whether it is a female or male line. 10 kg is enough to plant 1 acre and 5 kg for half 
an acre for female lines. Small seed sizes can give equal germination and yield 
performance as large seeds. However, small seed should not be planted too deep 
(i.e., not deeper than 5 cm).
Before planting your seeds, it is good to conduct germination test (10 days before 
planting) to prevent poor plant stand establishment due to poor quality seeds. To 
conduct your germination test, follow the steps below:
• Take 100 seeds at random.
• Make a shallow trench of 1-2m long.
• Place seeds evenly in the shallow trench.
• Cover with 3 -5 cm soil and water well for one week but do not soak the soil.
• Observe regularly and water when necessary.
• Count the number of plants emerged after 7 days.
Table 5 shows the number of seeds to plant per hill based on the results of the 
germination test.
Table 5. Recommended seeding rate after germination tests.
Number of plants counted per 100 
seeds
Number of seeds to be planted per 
hill
85 or more 1 or 2 seeds per hole
70 - 84 3 seeds per hole
50 - 70 Get better seeds
Less than 50 Do not attempt planting, get better 
seed
3.3.2. Planting Date/Time Based on Agro-Ecological Zone
Ghana has five main agro-ecological zones based on differences in climate, 
natural vegetation and soil type. These are Rain Forest (Moist and Wet Evergreen), 
Deciduous Forest, Transitional Zone, Coastal Savanna and Northern Savannah 
(Guinea and Sudan Savannah) zones (Figure 6).

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
29
Figure 6. Main agro-ecological zones of Ghana.
The later maize is planted, the lower the yield under rain-fed conditions. Suggested 
planting dates based on the major agro-ecological zones in Ghana have been 
provided in Table 6.
In order to practice isolation by time, hybrid seed producers can 
plant 3 – 4 weeks earlier or later than the suggested dates in 
Table 6, provided there is an irrigation facility installed at the seed 
production site.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
30
Table 6. Suggested planting dates for maize in Ghana.
Agro-ecological 
zone
Which month to plant Remarks
Major Season
Sudan savannah End-May to early-July Plant in July through early 
August after rains have 
established good soil 
moisture
Guinea savannah End-May to end-June
Transition Mid-March to end-April Plant in early March 
through the third week 
of March after rains have 
established good soil 
moisture (3 rains in a week)
Forest Early-March to end-April
Coastal savannah End-March to End-April
Minor season
Transition Mid-July to early-September Plant third week of 
August through the end 
of September after rains 
have established good 
soil moisture (3 rains in a 
week)
Forest Mid-July to early-September
3.3.3. Spacing and Plant Population
The optimum planting density of maize should be adjusted according to local 
conditions and types of parental lines to be grown. Planting should be done in lines 
or rows. Ropes or sighting poles should be used to mark the beginning and end of 
rows to enable you to plant in lines. You will need a minimum of 3 poles of at least 
2 meters long for this task. The more poles you use, the straighter your rows will 
be. Place one at each end of where the first row is to be and the others in between 
but in line with the two end poles. Seeding rates depend on soil-fertility levels, plant 
spacing and expected germination rates.
The width of rows and the spacing of plants within the row determines the plant 
population (Figure 7). The closer the spacing, the more plants there will be per unit 
area. The recommended number of maize plants per hectare varies from 36,000 to 
60,000, depending on the environmental yield potential and parental lines planted.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
31
Figure 7. Planting maize in lines at a given inter and intra row spacing.
High plant populations are appropriate under high rainfall or 
irrigated conditions where management is of a good standard. 
Lower plant populations should be used under dryland 
conditions, especially in drought prone areas, where a population 
of about 37,000 to 40,000 plants per hectare is recommended. 
Some female parental lines may be susceptible to lodging under high plant 
populations. Generally, the taller the parental line, the lower should be the plant 
population. Short parental lines may be grown at higher plant populations. 
Whatever the case, the minimum plant population for maize is 36,000 plants per ha. 
Exceeding the optimal plant population density could have a deleterious effect on 
maize yields (Figure 8).

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
32
Figure 8. Effect of plant population on the yield of maize.
3.3.4. Planting the Right Female: Male Ratio
One of the most important stages in production of hybrid seed is the establishment 
of the crop and the female: male ratio set. In hybrid seed production, the female 
lines are the seed bearers, whiles the male lines’ sole purpose is to provide pollen to 
fertilize the female lines. Thus, the two parent lines cannot have the same number 
of plants in the field. A balanced female to male plant ratio in the field is therefore of 
utmost importance.
Setting the right female to male plant ratio involves planting the 
seed production field to a larger number of the female plants, 
while at the same time providing an adequate amount of pollen 
pressure for good seed set in the female lines.
The following points are critical, and it should be well noted in order to set the right 
female to male plant ratio in the field:
• Ensure the correct parents are assigned to the seed field and that the female 
and male seed is clearly identifiable.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
33
• Seeding rate depends on female to male ratio. Normally, 3:1 or 6:2 female 
to male ratio is recommended (i.e. three (3) rows of female parent to one (1) 
row of male parent) (Figures 9 and 10).
• Spacing should be similar to commercially grown plants thus, 75 cm x 20/25 
cm recommended for the female parent (i.e. 53,300 –66,600 plants/ha). 
Some common recommended spacing is shown in Table 7.
Table 7. Common low and high plant population densities and their planting 
distances for maize.
Distance 
between plants/
cm
Distance 
between rows/
cm
Plant 
population/
acre
Plant population/
hectare
40 80 12,500 31,250
40 75 13,300 33,300
30 90 14,800 37,000
25 75 21,333 53,333
Plant population per acre or hectare was calculated by assuming one seed 
per hill. Figures in Table 7 would double if two seeds per hill were used.
• Male parent could be planted at a slightly higher population density to 
increase the pollen pressure or if the amount of pollen produced is small.
• Avoid mixing seeds for female and male inbred parents – use dyes or colored 
bags to label seeds for female and male parents.
• Male parent should be planted as border rows to serve as guard rows and for 
abundant pollen production.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
34
Figure 9. Setting a 3:1 female to male plants ratio in a hybrid maize seed 
field. Green lines depict female plant rows, whereas red lines represent 
male plant rows.
 
 
 
 
3:1 female: male ratio  6:2 female: male ratio  
Figure 10. Common female to male planting ratio on the field.
3.4. Synchronization of flowering
Obtaining good seed set on the female plants requires an ample overlap in the 
silking time of the female plants and the anthesis (pollen-shedding) time of the male 
plants. Thus, synchrony in silking and tasseling between female and male parents is 
very essential to obtain good seed set.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
35
If the female and male lines differ significantly in their silking and 
tasseling times by more than 5 days, planting should be staggered 
during plant establishment for the two parental lines. 
Preferably, the male plants should start shedding pollen when the first female silks 
start showing up and they should shed pollen for whatever length of time that it 
takes for all the female silks to develop. Notwithstanding, it does not take the same 
time for male and female plants to reach flowering, because of different growth 
rate and variations in the environment. Besides, the length of pollen shedding 
might be shorter than the ideal time for females to reach full silk at emergence. Any 
confounding of male and female flowering will decrease yields and uncover the 
female seed parent to contamination from foreign pollen.
Assuming 50% of the male line tassels in 55 days after planting and 50% of the 
female line silks 63 days after planting, there would be an eight-day gap between 
silking and tasseling in the field. This flowering interval could greatly affect seed set 
if the silking and tasseling times are not synchronized. To synchronize the silking 
and tasseling time using the above example, the female line should be planted at 
least five days earlier but not later than eight days before the male line is seeded.
3.5.  Fertilizer and Irrigation Requirements
3.5.1. Fertilizer Requirements
Maize can be grown successfully on soils with a pH of 5.0 - 7.0 but a moderately acid 
environment of pH 6.0 - 7.0 is optimum. pH outside this range could result in nutrient 
deficiency due to unavailability of nutrients, and sometimes mineral toxicity. Normal 
ear on a well fertilized high-yielding maize weighs about 300g and it has well filled 
tips. Small ears usually are a sign of low fertility. For better seed yields, amend soil 
with fertilizers. The three most important nutrient elements for maize are nitrogen, 
phosphorous, and potassium, but maize on some soils need zinc or boron in trace 
quantities.
Potash shortage shows up in ears with poorly filled tips and loose chaffy kernels. 
Phosphate shortages interfere with pollination and kernel fill. Ears are small, often 
twisted and with undeveloped kernels. Nitrogen is essential throughout the 
growing season. If plant runs out of nitrogen at the grain filling stage, ears become 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
36
small with low kernel protein content. Green silks at maturity may be caused by too 
much nitrogen in relation to other elements. Young maize leaves become marked 
with reddish-purple colors under phosphorus deficiency (Figure 11 B). Potash 
deficiency appears as a firing or drying along the tips and edges of lowest leaves 
(Figure 11 D). Nitrogen deficiency causes yellowing of leaves and severe stunting 
(Figure 11 A). Magnesium deficiency causes whitish strips along the veins and often 
a purplish color on the underside of the lower leaves (Figure 11 C).
 
Figure 11. Maize leaves expressing signs of major nutrient deficiency.
3.5.2.  Soil Testing
Before planting, take soil samples from the seed production site to the Soil Research 
Institute or University Laboratories for chemical analysis to know the pH, Nitrogen, 
Phosphorus, Potassium, percentage Organic Matter, Cation Exchange Capacity 
and other chemical properties. This information is required to help you formulate a 
fertilization program for maximum yields.
Follow the procedure described below to collect soil samples for chemical analysis:
1. Divide the field into different homogenous sampling units based on the 
visual observation and farmer’s experience.
2. Remove the surface litter at the sampling spot.
3. Drive the auger to a plough depth of 15 cm and draw the soil sample. A 
sampling tool should be uncontaminated; approximately uniform in cross 
section to the desired depth; and provide reproducible sampling units 
(Figure 12).

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
37
4. Collect at least 10 to 15 samples from each sampling unit and place in a 
bucket or tray.
5. If auger is not available, make a ‘V’ shaped cut to a depth of 15 cm in the 
sampling spot using spade (Figure 13).
6. Remove thick slices of soil from top to bottom of exposed face of the ‘V’ 
shaped cut and place in a clean container.
Figure 12. Soil sampling tools showing a spade and an auger.
Figure 13. A v-shaped cut made with a spade to collect soil samples.
7. Mix the samples thoroughly and remove foreign materials like roots, stones, 
pebbles and gravels.
8. Reduce the bulk to about half to one kilogram by quartering or 
compartmentalization.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
38
9. Quartering is done by dividing the thoroughly mixed sample into four equal 
parts. The two opposite quarters are discarded, and the remaining two 
quarters are remixed and the process repeated until the desired sample size 
is obtained.
10. Compartmentalization is done by uniformly spreading the soil over a clean 
hard surface and dividing into smaller compartments by drawing lines along 
and across the length and breadth. From each compartment a pinch of soil 
is collected. This process is repeated till the desired quantity of sample is 
obtained.
11. Collect the sample in a clean cloth or polythene bag.
12. Label the bag with information such as name of the seed company, location 
of the farm, survey number, previous crop grown, present crop, crop to be 
grown in the next season, date of collection, name of the sampler etc.
13. Send collected samples to an accredited lab for analysis.
3.5.3. Types of Fertilizers
The first consideration for fertilizing maize is the use of organic manure -- it is an 
excellent source of nutrients and has many other benefits for soils. Inorganic 
fertilizers should be considered as a supplement to manure if readily available. 
The addition of manure and ash will greatly improve the response of maize to the 
applied fertilizer. Under commercial set ups, addition of lime to acidic soils also 
improve response to fertilizers.
The fertilizer requirements of maize depend on the native soil fertility and seed yield 
target. Infertile soils require more fertilizer, as does a higher yield target.
Have your farm soil tested to know its fertility status and pH levels 
as described above. By doing this, you will be informed about the 
additional amount of fertilizer needed to meet target yields.
The number of bags of each fertilizer needed per hectare depends on the amount 
of N, P and K contained in the grade of fertilizer you purchase. Each ton of grain 
produced removes 15.0 to 18.0 kg of nitrogen, 2.5 to 3.0 kg of phosphorus and 3.0 
to 4.0 kg of potassium from the soil.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
39
Generally, apply fertilizers /organic manures under rain fed conditions as follows:
• Three (3) 50kg bags of NPK with micro nutrients 
• 25-10-10+6S+3MgO+0.3Zn or 20-10-10+3S  or 
23-10-5+2MgO+3S+0.3Zn for all agro-ecologies
• 11-22-21+5S+0.7Zn+0.5B for Guinea Savannah & Forest Transition
• 15-20-20+0.7Zn for Forest-Savannah Transition & Guinea Savannah
• at first two weeks, and one (1) 50kg bag of Urea (46 % N) per acre at 4 or 5 
weeks after planting (i.e. prior to flowering) respectively.
• Spread 0.8 – 1.6 tonnes/acre (20 bags each weighing 50 kg) poultry manure 
over the field and work into the soil before planting.
• Spread 2.5 tonnes/acre (48 bags each weighing 50 kg) good quality 
compost over the field and work into the soil before planting. 
• N fertilizers levelled up to 120 kg/ha are recommended for application in 
degraded soils. 60 kg P2O5 and 60 kg K2O per hectare can also be applied. 
• Green manuring can also be practiced. Plant mucuna at a spacing of 60 cm 
x 40 cm as a pre-maize cover legume in major season and harrow it into the 
soil after 3 months, before planting maize in minor season. 
• Nitrogen easily leaches through the soil including sandy soils, therefore, the 
total amount of nitrogen fertilizer required should be split between two in-
crop using the split top-dressing applications to ensure nitrogen availability 
throughout the critical growth stages of the crop for improved yields. In most 
cases, all the P and K and about two-thirds of the N are applied basally, with 
the rest of the N top-dressed later. 
3.5.4.  Modes of Fertilizer Application
Broadcasting of fertilizer to maize crop is wasteful and usually not recommended. 
Recommended method of fertilizer application to maize is the localized methods 
as shown below.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
40
• Localized placement – with special reference to the seed or plant. This 
method requires more labor.
• Band placement - fertilizer is placed in bands to one or both sides of the 
seed or plant. This is usually done in a definite space relationship to the plant 
or seed – usually 2-3 inches (5 – 7 cm) to the side and 2 inches (5cm) below 
the seed or plant (Figure 14).
Figure 14. Band placement of fertilizer to plants.
• Ring placement – fertilizer is place as a ring around each plant stand at a 
definite distance from the plant.
• Point placement – fertilizer is place at single points about 5 cm away from 
each plant stand (Figure 15).
Figure 15. Ring and point placement of fertilizer to plants.
3.5.5.  Time of Fertilizer Application
Fertilizer application should be carried out after weeding so that weeds do not 
benefit from applied fertilizers. Apply N-P-K compound fertilizer (60-60-60 kg/ha as 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
41
N, P2O5 and K 2O) within 7-10 days after planting and top-dress with 30 kg N/ha at 
4-6 weeks after planting 4 weeks for early maturing lines or 6 weeks for intermediate 
to late maturing varieties. The basal fertilizer must be applied before or at the time 
of planting . Planting with basal fertilizer application is recommended at the same 
time. Basal fertilizers which contains zinc are recommended for application every 
two to three years on sandy soils. The eight-leaf stage is the correct stage to apply 
a fertilizer as side dressing. Weather conditions and residual N in the soil will also 
determine when most N should be applied.
3.5.6. Irrigation Requirements
Maize produces very high yields under irrigation. It is therefore one of the most 
efficient grain crops in terms of water utilization. It can produce from 80 to 100 tons/
ha green material and 16 to 21 tons/ha of dry material within a relatively short period 
(100 to 120 days) under irrigation. It is strongly recommended that maize hybrid 
seed be produced under full irrigation in order to obtain the highest yields.
Maize grows best where total seasonal rainfall exceeds 500 mm. Maize is susceptible 
to both drought and waterlogging. Drought during the four-week period spanning 
flowering (silking and tasseling) can cause serious yield losses, especially in the 
drier areas (Figure 16).
Maize needs 500 to 800 mm of water per growing period, depending on the maturity 
period in the Forest and Transitional agro-ecological zones. In the Savannahs in the 
north, maize needs 600 – 900 mm of water per growing period.
Figure 16. Maize yield reduction due to water deficit.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
42
For a growing period of 90 – 120 days at a spacing of 75 cm x 25 cm, each maize 
plant would have used about 100 – 140 liters of water in the Forest and Transitional 
agro-ecological zones (equivalent to 6 mm of water per day). In the savannahs, the 
water requirements for maize would be 8 mm per day at a growing period of 90 -120 
days and a spacing of 75 cm x 25 cm.
Border irrigation can also be used for maize, but furrow or sprinkler irrigation is 
best used for irrigating row crops such as maize (Figure 17). Table 8 shows some 
recommendations on the type of irrigation method to use based on the soil type 
and the net irrigation application.
Table 8. Selection of an irrigation method based on the depth of the net 
irrigation application.
Soil type Rooting depth 
of the crop
Net irrigation 
depth per 
application 
(mm)
Irrigation method
Sand shallow 20-30 short furrows
medium 30-40 medium furrows, short 
borders
deep 40-50 long furrows, medium 
borders, small basins
Loam shallow 30-40 medium furrows, short 
borders
medium 40-50 long furrows, medium 
borders, small basins
deep 50-60 long borders, medium 
basins
Clay shallow 40-50 long furrows, medium 
borders, small basins
medium 50-60 long borders, medium 
basins
deep 60-70 large basins

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
43
Figure 17. Sprinkler and furrow irrigation system for maize.
3.6. Weed Control
Weeds’ presence would increase competition for nutrients and space with the 
maize crop therefore, effective weed control can be done mechanically, manually 
or chemically (using pre- and post-emergence herbicides). Control weeds, pests 
and diseases on time to avoid competition for plant nutrients.
Manual /Mechanical Weed Control
Weeds are removed or collected from crop fields by hand pulling or hoeing. For 
good manual weed control:
• Start hand weeding when weeds are large enough to grasp.
• Repeat the weeding once or twice.
• Never allow weeds to flower and set seeds in a crop field.
• Weeds are controlled using a rotating hoe (rotary weeder) to uproot and 
bury emerging young weeds between rows of maize plants.
• Start using a rotating hoe when emerged weeds are young (2- to 4-leaf 
stage).
• Repeat the hoeing one or two more times. Remove the weeds near the 
plants manually.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
44
Chemical Weed control
Chemical liquids, granules or gases are used to kill germinating or growing weeds, or 
even weed seeds. This method of weed control makes use of herbicides. Generally, 
the type of herbicide used is determined by the type of weeds present (either broad-
leaved or grassy weeds).
• You can use selective herbicides (e.g. atrazine) to control broad-leaved 
weeds in your maize farm. A selective herbicide kills certain plants but not 
others.
• You can also use pre- or post-emergence herbicides (Table 9). A pre-
emergence herbicide kills weeds as they germinate (sprout) from seeds. 
A post-emergence herbicide will control existing weeds but will do nothing 
to stop new weeds from germinating from seed.
• For all herbicide application, follow the instructions on the label.
• Carefully dispose of the empty containers after use.
• When in doubt, consult the local AEA for advice on available herbicides and 
their dosages.
Table 9. Common herbicides for controlling weeds on maize fields.
Name of herbicide Type of herbicide
Atrazine Pre-/Post-emergence
Alachlor + Atrazine Pre-emergence
Diuron (Karmex) Pre-emergence
Triclopyr (Garlon 600) Post-emergence
Oxadiazon (Ronstar 25 EC) Pre-/early post-emergence
Pendimethalin (Stomp 500) Pre-emergence
Bentazon (Basagran) Post-emergence
Glyphosate (Round-up) Pre-emergence
Paraquat (Gramoxone) Pre-emergence

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
45
Striga Control in the Savannah Regions
Striga hermonthica, commonly known as witchweed, is a serious parasitic weed in 
many parts of the Guinea and Sudan savannah zones of Ghana (Figure 18). The 
presence of a maize crop stimulates the germination of dormant Striga seed. Young 
Striga plants attach themselves to maize roots to draw moisture and nutrients, 
thereby inhibiting the maize plant. In severe cases, Striga can cause death to maize 
plants. If Striga infestation occurs, pull out Striga plants before they flower and 
produce seeds, or rotate maize with non-susceptible crops like soybean, cotton, 
groundnut or sunflower.
Figure 18. A maize field infested with Striga.
3.7. Common diseases and their control
Maize Streak
The maize streak is the most damaging disease of maize in Ghana. Maize streak 
virus is a foliar disease transmitted by the leafhopper.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
46
Symptoms:
• Early symptoms include very small, round, scattered spots in young leaves.
• The number of spots increases with plant growth and elongates causing leaf 
chlorosis with broken yellow streaks along veins contrasting with dark green 
of normal leaf.
• The disease can cause severe stunting and barrenness of affected plants.
• 
 • 
Maize streak
Management
• Chemical control of leafhoppers and
• Cultural practices
• Use of streak resistant varieties
• Also plant early in the recommended planting window of the area
Common rust by Puccinia species

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
47
Symptoms:
• Oval or elongated brown pustules/spots on upper and lower surfaces of 
leaves;
• Pustules may appear on tassels and ears and leaves may begin to yellow;
• In partially resistant corn hybrids, symptoms appear as chlorotic or necrotic 
flecks on the leaves which release little or no spore.
Management:
• Plant resistant hybrids
• Application of appropriate fungicides
Smut by Ustilago zeae
Symptoms:
• Galls on plant tissues which are initially green-white and turn into powdery 
dark brown or black spores
• Galls are common on ears, tassels, shoots or midrib of leaves
Maize smut

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
48
Management:
The only method that is completely effective is to grow resistant maize hybrids.
Downy Mildew disease (Peronosclerospora spp.)
Symptoms:
• The disease appears as early from two weeks after sowing resulting in 
chlorosis and stunting.
• In older plants the leaves show mottling, chlorotic streaking and lesions and 
white striped leaves.
• Usually the leaves are narrower and more erect when compared to healthy 
plants and are covered with a white, downy growth on both surfaces.
Maize downy mildew

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
49
Management:
• Grow available resistant varieties and hybrids.
• Follow crop rotation with non-host crops.
• Use suitable systemic fungicide for both seed treatment and foliar spray.
• Keep the fields free from weeds.
• Drying seeds before sowing reduces the disease incidence.
Stalk and Ear rot
Symptoms:
• Plants wilting and leaves changing color from light to dull green
• Lower stalk turns straw yellow;
• Black fungal fruiting bodies may be visible on the stalk, often at internodes
• If fungal infection affects the ears, it produces a red mould at the tips of the 
ear
• Early infection may result in the ear being covered in pink mycelium which 
causes the corn husk to adhere to the ear.
 
Maize stalk rot

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
50
Maize ear rot
Management:
• Stressed plants are more susceptible to the pathogen so providing adequate 
fertilization and irrigation can help reduce incidence of disease
• Control insects, especially stem and ear borer
Useful tips to manage pest and disease in maize
• Be aware of the pest and diseases common in the area where the crop is to 
be grown, and plant varieties that are resistant or tolerant to them.
• Start scouting field for pest infestation immediately after emergence of seeds 
and monitor their levels regularly to determine whether they are causing 
economic damage to warrant their control.
• Plant early to avoid the high pest pressure that are experienced with late 
plantings.
• Maize rotation with legumes can help with reducing weed, insect and 
disease pressure, enhance soil fertility and improve yields.
• Under severe pest infestation, use pesticide judiciously.
Integration of all the methods above is critical for better disease and pest 
management

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
51
3.8. Common Insect Pests of Maize and Their Management
Seedling Pests
Slugs and snails (Mollusca: Gastropoda) - Giant terrestrial snails (Achatina spp.)
• Consume the foliage of very young seedlings
• Control: lime/ash
Grasshoppers – Defoliate plants
• Control: chemical
Crickets (Gryllidae) - cut maize seedlings at ground level
• Control: preplant chemical treatment
Cutworms
• Larvae nocturnal and feed at night
• Burrow into soil during the day
• They cut stems of young plants and feed on fallen plant e.g. Agrotis segum
• Eggs are laid on leaves
• 1st and 2nd instars feed on leaves
• Matured 2nd instar drops to ground to cut stems
 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
52
Cutworm on maize
Damage symptom of cutworms
Management of Cutworms
• Maintain good sanitation especially weed-free farm to reduce egg laying by 
pest
• Include cover cropping to reduce weed competition
• Handpick pests if numbers are low
• Apply diatomaceous earth around plants
• Apply recommended insecticides late in the afternoon for best results
Other field insect pests
Armyworms
• Until recently not a serious pest in West Africa but now very important 
especially when rains come early in the year: examples include Spodoptera 
exempta, S. exigua, S. frugiperda
• Most important is Fall armyworm, S. frugiperda

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
53

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
54
• Females can lay ca. 300-700 eggs on grasses (cereals)
• Larva is the destructive stage
• Larval emergence is synchronized, and egg can diapause and hatch only 
when conditions are ripe.
Damage caused by armyworms
• Early stage larval feeding causes “windowpane” and shot holes in leaves
• Late-stage larval feeding causes elongated, ragged holes (see photo below).
• Larva may cut leaves in half
• Larva injures developing tassel at later stage and plugs whorl with wet, 
yellowish-brown frass

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
55
Symptoms of Fall armyworm
Management of Fall armyworm
• Vigorous monitoring of early signs of the pest
• Early or late planting
• Mass-trapping of males using pheromones
• Use of recommended insecticides to spray eg. Bypel, Emamectin benzoate, 
etc
• Rotate active ingredients
• Spraying should be done early morning or late afternoon and should target 
the whorl
• Ensure good sanitation on the farm
• Grasses near farms should also be targeted during spraying
• Use resistant varieties if available

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
56
Stem Borers
• Important pests of maize and cereals in general
• Can infest up to 70% of monocrop e.g. Sesamia spp., Busseola fusca, Eldana 
saccharina
 
Busseola fusca Maize stem borer damage symptoms
Stem Borer Damage
• Initial symptom is rows of oval or round or oblong perforations in very young 
leaves as a sign of feeding of young larvae on inner whorl
• All larvae finally bore into maize stalk
• Deep feeding in the whorl or young stems destroys the growing point or 
apical bud resulting in death of innermost whorl: Dead heart = Death of plant
• Dead heart can be easily pulled out
• When attack is late larvae feed on destroy developing tassels within its whorl
Management of Maize Stem Borers
• Vigorous monitoring of early signs of the pest
• Ensure good sanitation on the farm
• Avoid leaving maize stubbles on the farm after harvesting

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
57
• Early or late planting (timely planting)
• Use recommended systemic insecticides to spray: rotate active ingredients
• Use push-pull strategy involving use of legumes as push and suitable grass 
such as Elephant grass as pull
• Use resistant varieties
Leafhopper (Cicadulina mbila)
• Attacks maize and transmits maize streak virus (MSV)
Leafhopper (Cicadulina mbila)

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
58
Management of Leafhoppers
• Apply diatomaceous earth to plants
• Spot-treat plants with insecticidal soap to keep pest populations 
under control - thorough coverage of both upper and lower infested leaves 
is necessary for effective control.
• Apply recommended insecticides
Maize Stalk Borer
• Damage characterized by wilting and/or dying of the upper leaves or by 
ragged irregular holes chewed in the newly unrolled leaves
• Dead-heart can occur: the “dead heart” is caused by the insect boring into 
the stalk at the soil level and tunneling upward
• Destroys maize stalk
Maize stalk borer

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
59
Management of Maize Stalk Borer
• Use a combination of cultural practices (mostly intercropping and the ‘push-
pull’ system)
• Ensure good farm sanitation
• Use recommended synthetic insecticide or botanical such as neem powder 
(but only at the early stage, before the larvae have bored into the stem)
Corn earworm (Helicoverpa zea)
• Larvae feed on the leaves and sometimes destroying the inner whorl of the 
maize plant
• Such infestations can result in stunting of plants
• Can destroy many of the plants but usually <50% of the plants
• Destroy the corn ear
Corn earworm (Helicoverpa zea)

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
60
Management of corn earworm
• Spray or inject silks weekly with recommended insecticides to control larvae
• If corn earworms persist, apply Bacillus thuringiensis or spray Spinosad to 
silks at 5-10% formation and continue weekly until tassels turn brown
• Applying mineral oil to the silk where larva bores into the ear - the oil 
suffocates the larva
Storage Insect Pests
Storage Coleopteran Insect Pests of Maize
General Damage Caused By These Insect Pests
Direct damage
• Can cause severe losses in stored maize
• Infestation usually starts from the field: field-to-store pests
• Cause mechanical damage leaving holes in maize grain because adults 
emerge through these holes as larvae are internal grain feeders
• Leave living and dead insects, cast exuviae and faecal matter in grains
• Grains can be reduced to powder
Indirect damage
• Damage increases the efficacy of fungus infestation in their presence under 
storage
• Infestation increases heating and moisture content of grains due to 
metabolic activity of the insects and results in:
• caking and spoiling of grain
• stimulate seed germination
• decreased germination and seedling vigour
• spread of disease organisms throughout grain
• reduced grain and food/feed quality

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
61
 
Maize weevil (Sitophilus zeamais) Rice weevil (Sitophilus oryzae)
Damage on maize by weevils (Others cause similar damage)

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
62
 
Larger grain borer (LGB)
(Prostephanus truncatus) Lesser grain borer (Rhyzopertha dominica)
LGB prefers maize on cobs
 
Tribolium castaneum
Lepidopteran Insect Pests of Stored Maize

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
63
 
Angoumois grain moth Indian meal moth
(Sitotroga cerealella) (Plodia interpunctella)
 (Causes webbing of grains)
Management of Insect Pests of Stored Maize
• Promptly harvest maize
• Remove infested grain/sort maize before storage
• Clean and vacuum all cabinets or closets where insects have been found in 
warehouse
• Dry maize to <13% moisture content before storage
• Inspect storage area before storage and Clean storage area/ maintain good 
sanitation in the store
• Examine grain regularly so that infestation can be detected early
• Fumigate maize in storage if infested in warehouse
• Use hermetic storage bags to store maize
3.9. Rogueing
The removal of undesirable and off-type plants of the same crop from the field planted 
to a desired variety/line. Regularly inspect the field for pests, weeds and diseases 
during the vegetative growth of the seed crop and control these as necessary. From 
the 6- to 12-leaf stage and before tassels emerge; remove off-types from both male 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
64
and female rows. Off-types are usually clearly identifiable as taller or smaller, earlier- 
or later-flowering, or plants with characteristics distinctly different from the norm. 
Descriptions of the distinctive qualities of the parents must be accessible from the 
developer of the inbred lines, and will incorporate viewpoints, for example, angle of 
the leaf blade to the stem, coloration of the leaf sheath and stem, and the state of 
the tassel. People who conduct rogueing must get comfortable with these features 
so that just off-type plants are removed or destroyed totally. Be careful that at times, 
after cutting the off-type plant at the base, side shoots may develop and create an 
undesirable cob and tassel. Along these lines, it is ideal to uproot off-type plants. It 
must be done early to avoid cross contamination or shattering of the undesirable 
seeds. Parameters for rogueing include deviations from:
• Uniformity in plant height
• Uniformity in tasseling or silking
• Color or shape of leaves, tassel or silk
• Presence or absence of other morphological pigments
• Seed color
3.9.1. When to Rogue
Rouging ought to be directed before genetic or physical contamination happens 
and during times favorable for visual identification.
• Rogue volunteer plants: these are effectively distinguished by size and 
position out of the rows (post emergence).
• During vegetative advancement, remove off-type plants that go astray 
from the given genotype regarding root and stalk development, plant type, 
pigmentation, leaf and stem pubescence, etc. Rogueing effectively, during 
this period will help decrease the remaining task during the critical flowering 
period.
• Significant agronomic and morphological qualities can undoubtedly be 
distinguished at the flowering stage. This is the basic stage to avoid genetic 
contamination of the crop. Rogueing on male plants must be finished before 
pollen shedding starts. Rogueing on female plants ought to be done not 
long after silk-emergence.
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
65
3.10. Detasseling
In production of hybrid maize seed, detasseling of the female plants must satisfy 
the necessary guideline and be led in a convenient manner. Any deferrals in 
detasseling or insufficient detasseling that outcomes in decoration stubs or missed 
plants will genuinely lessen the genetic purity of the hybrid seed and may bring 
about dismissal for certification. The following should be noted:
• Start detasseling immediately the top 3-4 cm of the tassel is visible above 
the leaf whorl.
• Timely detasseling (removal of the male reproductive part) in female rows 
is the most critical in producing genetically pure hybrid maize seeds (Figure 
19)
• Tassels in the female rows must be removed prior to the shedding of pollen 
and silk emergence.
• Flag leaves of female plants should not be removed during detasseling – it 
could significantly reduce seed yield.
• Some female parent plant types are more easily detasseled than others. 
For example, some female parents have tassels that are physically hard 
to pull out, others break easily, and some begin shedding pollen before 
fully emerging from the upper leaves. Tall female plants, particularly when 
the female is a single-cross hybrid, are hard to detassel. In top-cross or 
varietal cross hybrids, where the female is an open-pollinated variety, 
time of tassel exertion in the female populace will change. In conclusion, 
with certain parents, silks emerge much earlier or later than pollen shed. 
Every one of these circumstances, might be exacerbated and make for 
difficult detasseling supervision and potential administration issues. Close 
supervision of the field is vital.
HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
66
Figure 19. Detasseling of the tassel from female plants before pollen 
shedding. Adapted from Ethiopian Seed Association (2014).
3.11. Male Removal
Remove the males from the field as soon as possible after pollination. Male plants are 
cut at the base and either removed from the field or left to rot in the row. Removing 
males soon after pollination ensures that there will be no mixture of male and female 
seed at harvest (Figure 20). Male removal also improves the yield of the female by 
allowing more light penetration into the female rows and reducing competition for 
moisture. Note that weeds will take advantage of the free ground and will need to 
be controlled.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
67
Figure 20. Removal of male plants after pollination. Adapted from Ethiopian 
Seed Association (2014)
3.12. Harvesting and Post-Harvest Processing
• Harvest mature grains only from female rows at physiological maturity or 
when the black layer forms.
• Field must be free from all known contaminants.
• If harvesting is done mechanically, farm implements must be thoroughly 
cleaned to prevent mechanical admixtures
Post-harvest operations include:
• Drying of harvested cobs to attain required moisture content, MC (12 % MC 
on fresh weight basis)
• Sorting to remove damaged or diseased ears (Figure 21)
• Shelling of sorted ears
• Cleaning and grading to remove inert materials, undersized seeds, broken 
seeds, weed seeds etc. seed grading machines are normally used to grade 
seeds based on their size and shape.
• Seed treatment with chemical protectants before seed storage and bagging 
– fungicides, fumigation and insecticides are usually used

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
68
• Seed packaging
• Tagging or labelling of bagged seeds– labels should be prepared in 
duplicates (one is placed inside the bagged seeds and the other is attached 
to the seed bag)
Figure 21. Sorting of cobs on the field or at shelling site. Adapted from 
Ethiopian Seed Association (2014)
3.12. Seed Bagging and Labelling
In the conditioning process, bagging is the last step. Several essential functions are 
achieved by seed packaging, these include:
• Serves as a convenient unit for handling, transport, and storage.
• Protects seed against contamination and mechanical damage.
• Provides a suitable environment for storage.
• Provides a barrier against seed loss and the escape of pesticides.
• Serves as a sales promoter.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
69
Seed packaging material may consist of cloth, jute, plastic, paper, metal or various 
combinations of products. Plastic, paper, or plastic/paper combinations are 
the materials of choice for packaging maize seed. Transparent plastic bags are 
preferred in some areas because farmers can see the seed. However, the use of 
plastic bags may be risky if seed is exposed to the sun and warm temperatures, 
resulting in accelerated respiration and likely damage. Seed may be packed by 
hand or with semi-automatic or automatic equipment. After filling the bag with the 
required amount of seed, the bag is sewn or heat sealed and a tag is attached which 
should include the following:
• Name of the producer
• Name of certifying agency
• Crop species
• Name of the variety and class of seed
• Germination percentage
• Purity percentage
• Year/Date of production
• Net weight in kg
• Batch or identification number
• Moisture content in percentage
3.14. Seed Storage
Hybrid maize seed is stored for a number of reasons and for various durations. 
The two most critical storage conditions are temperature and moisture content. 
The moisture content of stored seed equilibrates with the relative humidity in the 
storage environment. For seed storage, high humidity is the enemy. High humidity 
promotes the rapid growth of microbes (fungi and bacteria) and insects. Generally, 
at low humidity below 35%, both microbes and insects do not grow (Figure 22). 
Cold storage facilities should be installed for proper storage. If cold storage facilities 
are not available, the principle is to make the seed dry, and then keep it dry using 
water-proof packaging materials and desiccants. The seed can be stored longer 
with minimal damage, if the air temperature and the relative humidity is low. Ideally, 
store seed in a shed to protect it from rain and heat, while providing security. Seeds 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
70
should not be stored in jute bags, as they are not waterproof. Inexpensive electronic 
meters for measuring relative humidity should be installed in the storage room. 
Alternative, relative humidity indicators (humidicators) paper that changes color 
in response to the ambient relative humidity could be used in seed stores (Figure 
23). Bags or packs containing seeds should be arranged gently and tenderly in the 
storage room and should never be dropped from any height to the ground (Figure 
24).
Cob may store maize seed temporarily, either in loose stacks or in cribs, provided 
the grain moisture is less than 13%. Cribbed or binned ears of high moisture content 
are prone to attacks by storage pests. Kernels and the cob will be in moisture 
equilibrium only at about 13% moisture content. When the seed moisture content 
is high, the cobs contain significantly higher moisture than the seed, which will 
promote disease development and insect growth. A key factor in cribbing maize on 
the cob is the width of the crib, the narrower the crib the better (2 to 3 m maximum), 
so as to allow sufficient natural ventilation through the cobs.
Figure 22. Diagram illustrating the combinations of temperature and MC (or 
ERH) at which different organisms can grow in storage for maize. Moisture 

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
71
contents at corresponding ERH values approximate those for cereal grains. Below 
65% ERH, products are safe from fungal growth, and below 35% ERH, neither 
microbes nor insects can grow. Storage life will increase exponentially as ERH and 
temperature decrease, but even at 65% ERH, dry food products can maintain quality 
for up to a year at ambient temperatures. Adapted from Bradford et al. (2018).
Figure 23. Measurement of relative humidity (RH) and its relationship 
to product moisture content (MC) and storage potential. Adapted from 
Bradford et al. (2018)
(A) Inexpensive electronic meter to measure temperature and RH. (B) RH indicator 
(Humidicator) paper that changes color in response to the ambient RH (www.
microessentiallab.com). (C) Graph showing an example of an ERH versus MC 
isotherm with the Humidicator indicator strip scale superimposed on it. (D) The 
DryCard™ has a laminated RH indicator strip with an adjacent RH scale for durability 
and convenience.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
72
Figure 24. Stored seed in labelled bags in well-constructed stacks on pallets 
with a bin card to monitor stock quantities. Adapted from Ethiopian Seed 
Association (2014)
3.15. Bulk Storage of Seed
The benefit of mass stockpiling of seed is that it requires less space, since the 
thickness of seed in mass is about 0.75 t/m 3. Besides, with well-constructed silos 
and conveyors seed misfortunes are decreased, less work is required for taking 
care of the seed and the expense of capacity bags is removed. Mass stored seed is 
likewise simpler to disinfect. The demerit is the high capital expense, in spite of the 
fact that this might be balanced after some time with the saving in bags. Storehouses 
ought to consistently be filled and discharged from the inside to maintain a strategic 
distance from over the top weight developing on one side of the storehouse. The 
angle of rest of seed of most field crops is about 25°.

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
73
3.16. Record keeping
Several steps are involved in hybrid seed production, most of which are affected 
by the environment such as; air temperature, rainfall, soil type and management. 
When producing a hybrid for the first time, it is improbable that everything will turn 
out well and there is normally a steep learning curve with each new hybrid created. 
Thus, it is useful to keep far-reaching records of all phases of production and to 
utilize these records to improve production in following seasons. Notwithstanding 
these records, records for precipitation, funds, work and seed stocks will enhance 
management of all farm resources. The utilization of a day-page diary in which 
day-by-day undertakings are needed to be done, contacts made, and outstanding 
occasions recorded will give a significant record of each season. Such record 
keeping will supply significant verifiable historical information valuable for present 
and future seed production

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
74
Farmers’ productivity increases when hybrid seeds are grown, but this might be 
conceivable if the seed meets high genetic, physical and phytosanitary measures. 
Good management of hybrid seed fields and adherence to seed regulations 
guarantee quality seed production. Starting with the right source seed, a series 
of steps are involved to produce quality maize hybrid, each dependent on the 
success of preceding steps. This manual has laid out the fundamental procedures 
of each step. By following these in a convenient and efficient way and conforming 
to the required guidelines, the final certified seed will be marketable, and farmers 
will achieve good yields that will contribute to profitability and improve standard of 
living.
4.0 Conclusion

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
75
Adu, G. B., Abdulai, M. S., Alidu, H., Nustugah, S. K., Buah, S. S., Kombiok, J. M., Obeng-
Antwi, K., Abudulai, M. and Etwire, P. M. 2014. Recommended Production 
Practices for Maize in Ghana. DOI: 10.13140/2.1.4376.3527; available at https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/270511013_Recommended_Production_
Practices_for_Maize_in_Ghana
Bernado, R. 2014. Essentials of Plant Breeding. Stemma Press, Woodbury, MN, USA.
Bradford, K.J., Dahal, P., Asbrouck, J. Van, Kunusoth, K., Bello, P., Thompson, J., and 
Wu, F. 2018. Trends in Food Science & Technology The dry chain : Reducing 
postharvest losses and improving food safety in humid climates. Trends Food 
Sci. Technol. 71: 84–93. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2017.11.002.
Ethiopian Seed Association. 2014. Hybrid maize seed production manual. 
Available at: http://publication.eiar.gov.et:8080/xmlui/bitstream/
handle/123456789/3181/028%20Hybrid%20Maize%20Seed%20
Production%20Manual.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
MacRobert, J.F., P.S. Setimela, J. Gethi, and M. Worku. 2014. Maize Hybrid 
Seed Production Manual. Mexico, D.F.: CIMMYT. Available at: https://
excellenceinbreeding.org/sites/ default/files/manual/98078.pdf
Melchinger, A.E., and Gumber, R.K. 1998. Overview of Heterosis and Heterotic 
Groups in Agronomic Crops. Page in K.R. Larnkey and J.E. Staub, eds. . 
doi:10.2135/cssaspecpub25.c3.
Plessis, du J. 2003. Maize production. Compiled by Directorate Agricultural 
Information Services, Department of Agriculture, in cooperation with ARC-
Grain Crops Institute. Available at: https://www.arc.agric.za/arc-gci/Fact%20
Sheets%20Library/Maize%20 Production.pdf
5.0 Bibliography

HYBRID MAIZE SEED PRODUCTION | MANUAL
76
Seed Co Limited. 2018. The Farmers’ guide: grain crops. Available at: https://www.
seedcogroup.com/sites/default/files/Agronomy%20Manual.pdf
VOTO. 2016 A complete curriculum and guide to maize production in Ghana. 
Available at http://agricinghana.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/maize-
production-guide-ghana-2016.pdf


SUPPORTED BY FAO